<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>Let us say you are newly introduced to all this neoreaction business. You’re aware that the coverage and representation given us by the media has likely been stricken by inaccuracies due at least to simple human limits, if not sheer malevolence, and you are willing to gaze into this void at its source. To assist with that end, this is a sequence of readings selected for their representation of the overall theme of the Dark Enlightenment. The point is less to offer up neoreactionary texts with the intent of persuading you of particular premises (though that is still an intent) but to provide an introduction to the neoreactionary mode of thought.</p>

  <p>Altogether this canon must be hundreds of thousands of words in length; the Open Letter to Open-Minded Progressives is by itself more than 100,000 words long. For that, this selection is not remotely exhaustive, but thorough. You shall become acquainted with arguments which favor monarchy, patriarchy, anarchy, ethno-nationalism, and a number of other modern triggers even more horrifying. Most will reject our thought without any reading of the source material, but for those who find themselves stricken by a morbid curiosity and a desire to grapple with ideas you would never hear in the halls of academia, this is for you. Be warned, however. The nature of engagement necessitates, whether you agree or disagree with our aims, that you shall be changed. For better or worse, that is up to you.</p>

  <p>A strict top-to-bottom reading isn’t necessary, but the categories have been arranged in an order conducive to complete beginners. The <em>Major Works</em> can be skipped for brevity, but it is certainly the case that the hard core of neoreaction is found in those texts. <em>Initial Remarks</em> will provide an introduction to the broad areas of agreement and the boundaries between neoreaction and related thought systems. <em>Taking the Red Pill</em> is a series of trenchant analyses of civilization which shall instruct in new hermeneutics for the interpretation of experience and social phenomena. <em>Whipping Up a Society from Scratch</em> delves into theory concerning the conditioning of individual’s lives by the social structures they participate in. Finally, <em>Tinkering with Ideology</em> illuminates insights as to the propagation and spread of ideas.</p>

  <p>Best of luck.</p>

  <h4 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Major Works</h4>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/">The Dark Enlightenment</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/books/Mencius%20Moldbug/Open%20Letter.pdf">An Open Letter to Open-Minded Progressives</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://slatestarcodex.com/2013/03/03/reactionary-philosophy-in-an-enormous-planet-sized-nutshell/">Reactionary Philosophy in an Enormous, Planet-Sized Nutshell</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.amazon.com/What-Neoreaction-Social-Historical-Evolution-Civilization-ebook/dp/B00FIVER0K/">What is Neoreaction: Ideology, Social-Historical Evolution, and the Phenomena of Civilization</a></li>
  </ul>

  <h4 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Initial Remarks</h4>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="http://anomalyuk.blogspot.ca/2013/04/introduction-to-neoreaction.html">Introduction to the Neoreaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/neoreaction-for-dummies/">Neoreaction (for Dummies)</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://nickbsteves.wordpress.com/2013/05/07/the-reactionary-consensus/">The Reactionary Consensus</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anomalyuk.blogspot.com/2013/04/reactionary-unity.html">Reactionary Unity</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://blog.jim.com/culture/what-unites-neoreaction.html">What Unites Neoreaction?</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/trichotomy/">Trichotomy</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/04/formalist-manifesto-originally-posted.html">A Formalist Manifesto</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/06/potential-approximations-of-neoreaction/">Potential Approximations of Neoreaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/oaks-vs-sandboxes/">Oaks vs. Sandboxes</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/premises-of-reactionary-thought/">Premises of Neoreactionary Thought</a></li>
  </ul>

  <h4 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Taking the Red Pill</h4>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/25/how-to-neoreaction/">How to Look at the World Like a Neoreactionary</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">An Introduction to Group Dynamics</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/10/07/material-conditions-mass-psychology/">Material Conditions, Mass Psychology</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://theden.tv/2013/07/29/how-democracy-fails-brechts-solution/#sthash.VMEt981V.dpbs">How Democracy Fails: Brecht’s Solution</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/09/30/the-part-is-subordinate-female-outliers/">The Part is Subordinate to the Whole: Female Outliers</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2013/07/16/language-is-a-badge-of-tribal-membership/">Language is a Badge of Tribal Membership</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://theden.tv/2013/11/22/3-reasons-diversity-isnt-working/#sthash.Jh6EanzS.dpbs">Three Reasons Diversity isn’t Working</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://iparallax.wordpress.com/2013/12/31/post-modernisms-final-causes-and-pyrrhic-victory/">Postmodernism’s Final Causes and Pyrrhic Victory</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/11/05/making-neoreaction-simple/">Making Neoreaction Simple</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://theden.tv/2013/07/29/the-cathedral-and-the-bizarre-benjamin-crumps-manufactured-consent/#sthash.492pAQA5.dpbs">The Cathedral and the Bizarre: Benjamin Crump’s Manufactured Consent</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/11/22/a-decent-life-for-decent-people/">A Decent Life for Decent People</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://socialpathology.blogspot.com/2013/09/conservatism-and-cognitive-miser.html">Conservatism and the Cognitive Miser</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://socialpathology.blogspot.ca/2013/08/the-bilogical-vote-its-implications-for.html">The Biological Vote: Its Implications for Conservatism</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2013/08/18/clausewitz-lenin-robin-dunbar/">Clausewitz, Lenin, Robin Dunbar</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/the-monkey-trap/">The Monkey Trap</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://theden.tv/2013/07/29/screwed-since-1913/#sthash.d6HGWdz5.dpbs">Screwed Since 1913</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://freenortherner.wordpress.com/2014/01/10/creeping-horror/">Creeping Horror</a></li>
  </ul>

  <h4 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Whipping Up a Society from Scratch</h4>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="http://habitableworlds.wordpress.com/2013/05/21/myth-rhetoric-and-the-dark-enlightenment/">Myth, Rhetoric, and the Dark Enlightenment</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/04/stability-as-virtue-of-civilization/">Stability as Virtue of Civilization</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/reconciling-transhumanismand-neoreaction/">Reconciling Transhumanism and Neoreaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/10/17/inaccessible-is-ungovernable/">Inaccessible is Ungovernable</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://theden.tv/2013/08/04/chinese-eugenics-and-why-losers-dont-win/#sthash.evlTGYwH.dpbs">Chinese Eugenics and Why Losers Don’t Win</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2013/10/18/monarchy/">Monarchy</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/08/31/burnout/">Burnout</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://iamlegionnaire.wordpress.com/2014/01/21/the-path-to-legionnaire-the-power-of-myth/">The Power of Myth</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/the-cult-of-neoreaction/">The Cult of Neoreaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/12/06/neoreaction-liberalism-conservatism-reject-the-isms/">Neoreaction, Liberalism, and Conservatism: Reject the Isms</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/20/ur-malthusianism/">Ur-Malthusianism</a></li>
  </ul>

  <h4 class="sigil_not_in_toc">Tinkering with Ideology</h4>

  <ul>
    <li><a href="http://socialpathology.blogspot.ca/2013/04/taking-on-cathedral.html">Taking on the Cathedral</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.moreright.net/transhumanism-and-palingenesis/">Transhumanism and Palingenesis</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://raptros.wordpress.com/2013/05/09/to-light-a-fire-under-the-ass-of-the-neoreaction/">To Light a Fire Under the Ass of the Neoreaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://blog.jim.com/culture/game-dark-enlightenment-and-reaction.html">Game, Dark Enlightenment, and Reaction</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/12/05/cipher-ideology/">Cipher Ideology</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2013/05/dove.html">The Dove Sketches Beauty Scam</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://thelastpsychiatrist.com/2013/09/real_men_want_to_drink_guinnes.html">Real Men Want to Drink Guinness, But Don’t Expect Them to Pay for It</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/10/04/a-typology-of-magic/">A Typology of Magic</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/horrorism/">Horrorism</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/discrimination/">Discrimination</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://socialpathology.blogspot.ca/2013/12/orwell-and-newspeak.html">Orwell and Newspeak</a></li>

    <li><a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2014/01/20/wittgenstein-ideology-and-signaling/">Wittgenstein, Ideology, and Signaling</a></li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
