<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <header>
    <h3>Part 4d: Odd Marriages</h3><time datetime="2012-06-15 16:06:00">June 15, 2012</time>
  </header>

  <p>The origins of the word ‘cracker’ as a term of ethnic derision are distant and obscure. It seems to have already circulated, as a slur targeting poor southern whites of predominantly Celtic ancestry, in the mid-18th century, derived perhaps from ‘corn-cracker’ or the Scots-Irish ‘crack’ (banter). The rich semantic complexion of the term, inextricable from the identification of elaborate racial, cultural, and class characteristics, is comparable to that of its unmentionable dusky cousin – “the ‘<a href="http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/music_box/2012/06/gwyneth_paltrow_and_niggas_in_paris_is_it_ever_ok_for_white_people_to_use_the_word_.html">N-</a>‘ <a href="http://glpiggy.net/2012/06/12/it-wont-stop/">word</a>” – and draws from the same well of generally recognized but forbidden truths. In particular, and emphatically, it testifies to the <em>illicit truism</em>that people are more excited and animated by their differences than by their commonalities, ‘clinging bitterly’ – or at least tenaciously – to their non-uniformity, and obstinately resisting the universal categories of enlightened population management. Crackers are grit in the clockwork of progress.</p>

  <p>The most delectable features of the slur, however, are entirely fortuitous (or Qabbalistic). ‘Crackers’ break codes, safes, organic chemicals – sealed or bonded systems of all kinds – with eventual geopolitical implication. They anticipate a <em>crack-up</em>, schism or secession, confirming their association with the anathematized disintegrative undercurrent of Anglophone history. No surprise, then – despite the linguistic jumps and glitching – that the figure of the recalcitrant cracker evokes a still-unpacified South, insubordinate to the manifest destiny of Union. This returns it, by short-circuit, to the most problematic depths of its meaning.</p>

  <p><em>Contradictions</em> demand resolution, but <em>cracks</em> can continue to widen, deepen, and spread. According to the cracker ethos, when things can fall apart – it’s OK. There’s no need to reach agreement, when it’s possible to split. This <em>cussedness</em>, pursued to its limit, tends to a hill-billy stereotype set in a shack or rusting trailer at the end of an Appalachian mountain path, where all economic transactions are conducted in cash (or moonshine), interactions with government agents are conducted across the barrel of a loaded shotgun, and timeless anti-political wisdom is summed in the don’t-tread-on-me reflex: “Get off my porch.” Naturally, this disdain for integrative debate (dialectics) is coded within the mainstream of Anglocentric global history – which is to say, Yankee evangelical Puritanism – as a deficiency not only of cultural sophistication, but also of basic intelligence, and even the most scrupulous adherent of social constructivist righteousness immediately reverts to hard-hereditarian psychometrics when confronted by cracker obstreperousness. To those for whom a broad trend of socio-political progress seems like a simple, incontestable fact, the refusal to recognize anything of the kind is perceived as clear evidence of retardation.</p>

  <p>Since stereotypes generally have high statistical truth-value, it’s more than possible that crackers are clustered heavily on the left of the white IQ bell-curve, concentrated there by generations of dysgenic pressure. If, as Charles Murray argues, the efficiency of meritocratic selection within American society has steadily risen and conspired with assortative mating to transform class differences into genetic castes, it would be passing strange if the cracker stratum were to be characterized by conspicuous cognitive elevation. Yet some awkwardly intriguing questions intervene at this point, as long as one diligently pursues the stereotype. Assortative mating? How can that work, when crackers marry their cousins? Oh yes, there’s<em>that</em>. Drawing on population groups beyond the north-western <a href="http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/2012/02/06/medieval-manoralism-and-the-hajnal-line/">Hajnal</a> <a href="http://jayman.blog.com/2012/06/14/more-on-farming-and-inheritance-systems-part-i-iq/">Line</a>, traditional cracker kinship patterns are notably atypical of the exogamous Anglo (WASP) norm.</p>

  <p>The tireless ‘<a href="http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/">hbdchick</a>’ is the crucial resource on this topic. Over the course of a truly monumental series of blog <a href="http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/start-here/">posts</a>, she employs <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/W._D._Hamilton">Hamiltonian</a> conceptual tools to investigate the borderland where nature and culture intersect, comprising kinship structures, the differentiations they require in the calculus of inclusive fitness, and the distinctive ethnic profiles in the evolutionary psychology of altruism that result. In particular, she directs attention to the abnormality of (North-West) European history, where obligatory exogamy – through rigorous proscription of cousin marriage – has prevailed for 1,600 years. This distinctive orientation towards outbreeding, she suggests, plausibly accounts for a variety of bio-cultural peculiarities, the most historically significant of which is a unique pre-eminence of reciprocal (over familial) altruism, as indicated by emphatic individualism, nuclear families, an affinity with ‘corporate’ (kinship-free) institutions, highly-developed contractual relationships among strangers, relatively low levels of nepotism / corruption, and robust forms of social cohesion independent of tribal bonds.</p>

  <p>Inbreeding, in contrast, creates a selective environment favoring tribal collectivism, extended systems of family loyalty and honor, distrust of non-relatives and impersonal institutions, and – in general – those ‘clannish’ traits which mesh uncomfortably with the leading values of (Eurocentric) modernity, and are thus denounced for their primitive ‘xenophobia’ and ‘corruption’. Clannish values, of course, are bred in clans, such as those populating Britain’s Celtic fringe and borderlands, where cousin marriage persisted, along with its associated socio-economic and cultural forms, especially herding (rather than farming), and a disposition towards extreme, vendetta-style <a href="http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/2012/01/27/culture-of-honor/">violence</a>.</p>

  <p>This analysis introduces the central paradox of ‘white identity’, since the specifically European ethnic traits that have structured the moral order of modernity, slanting it away from tribalism and towards reciprocal altruism, are inseparable from a unique heritage of outbreeding that is intrinsically corrosive of ethnocentric solidarity. In other words: it is almost exactly weak ethnic groupishness that makes a group ethnically modernistic, competent at ‘corporate’ (non-familial) institution building, and thus objectively privileged / advantaged within the dynamic of modernity.</p>

  <p>This paradox is most fully expressed in the radical forms of European ethnocentric revivalism exemplified by paleo- and neo-Nazism, confounding its proponents and antagonists alike. When exceptionally advanced ‘race-treachery’ is your quintessential racial feature, the opportunity for viable ethno-supremacist politics disappears into a logical abyss – even if occasions for large-scale trouble-making no doubt remain. Admittedly, a Nazi, by definition, is willing (and eager) to sacrifice modernity upon the altar of racial purity, but this is either not to understand, or to tragically affirm, the inevitable consequence – which is to be out-modernized (and thus defeated). Identity politics is for losers, inherently and unalterably, due to an essentially parasitical character that only works from the left. Because inbreeding systematically contra-indicates for modern power, racial <em>Übermenschen</em> make no real sense.</p>

  <p>In any case, however endlessly fascinating Nazis may be, they are not any kind of reliable key to the history or direction of <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Cracker-Culture-Celtic-Ways-South/dp/0817304584">cracker culture</a>, beyond setting a logical limit to the programmatic construction and usage of white identity politics. Tattooing swastikas on their foreheads does nothing to change that. (<a href="http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/2012/05/31/hatfields-and-mccoys/">Hatfields vs McCoys</a> is more Pushtun than Teuton.)</p>

  <p>The conjunction taking place in the Cracker Factory is quite different, and far more perplexing, entangling the urbane, cosmopolitan advocates of hyper-contractarian marketization with romantic traditionalists, ethno-particularists, and nostalgics of the ‘Lost Cause’. It is first necessary to understand this entanglement in its full, mind-melting weirdness, before exploring its lessons. For that, some semi-random stripped-down data-points might be helpful:</p>

  <p>* The <a href="https://mises.org/page/1448/About-The-Mises-Institute">Mises Institute</a> was founded in Auburn, Alabama.</p>

  <p>* Ron Paul newsletters from the 1980s contain <a href="http://articles.businessinsider.com/2011-12-20/politics/30537102_1_newsletters-paul-campaign-conspiracy-theories">remarks</a> of a decidedly Derbyshirean hue.</p>

  <p>* Derbyshire <a href="http://johnderbyshire.com/Opinions/USPolitics/libertyliberty.html">hearts</a> Ron Paul.</p>

  <p>* Murray Rothbard has <a href="http://www.lewrockwell.com/rothbard/rothbard31.html">written</a> in defense of HBD.</p>

  <p>* lewrockwell.com contributors include <a href="http://www.lewrockwell.com/dilorenzo/dilorenzo-arch.html">Thomas J. DiLorenzo</a> and <a href="http://www.lewrockwell.com/woods/woods-arch.html">Thomas Woods</a>.</p>

  <p>* Tom Palmer <a href="http://tomgpalmer.com/2005/07/01/hans-hermann-hoppe-and-the-german-extremist-nationalist-right/">doesn’t</a> heart Lew Rockwell or Hans-Hermann Hoppe because “Together They Have Opened the Gates of Hell and Welcomed the Most Extreme Right-Wing Racists, Nationalists, and Assorted Cranks”</p>

  <p>* Libertarians / constitutionalists account for 20% of the SPLC ‘Radical Right’ watch <a href="http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-report/browse-all-issues/2012/summer/30-to-watch">list</a>(Chuck Baldwin, Michael Boldin, Tom DeWeese, Alex Jones, Cliff Kincaid, and Elmer Stewart Rhodes)</p>

  <p>… perhaps that’s enough to be going on with (although there’s plenty more within easy reach). These points have been selected, questionably, crudely, and prejudicially, to lend impressionistic support to a single basic thesis: <em>fundamental socio-historical forces are crackerizing libertarianism</em>.</p>

  <p>If the tentative research conclusions drawn by hbdchick are accepted as a frame, the oddity of this marriage between libertarian and neo-confederate themes is immediately apparent. When positioned on a bio-cultural axis, defined by degrees of outbreeding, the absence of overlap – or even proximity – is dramatically exposed. One pole is occupied by a radically individualistic doctrine, focused near-exclusively upon mutable networks of voluntary interchange of an economic type (and notoriously insensitive to the very existence of non-negotiable social bonds). Close to the other pole lies a rich culture of local attachment, extended family, honor, contempt for commercial values, and distrust of strangers. The distilled rationality of fluid capitalism is juxtaposed to traditional hierarchy and non-alienable value. The absolute prioritization of <em>exit</em> is jumbled amongst folkways from which no exit is even imaginable.</p>

  <p>Stapling the two together, however, is a simple, ever more irresistible conclusion: liberty has no future in the Anglophone world outside the prospect of secession. The coming crack-up is the only way out.</p>

  <footer>
    <hr />
    Original Article: <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20120617172506/http://www.thatsmags.com/shanghai/article/2351/the-dark-enlightenment-part-4d">https://web.archive.org/web/20120617172506/http://www.thatsmags.com/shanghai/article/2351/the-dark-enlightenment-part-4d</a>
  </footer>
</body>
</html>
