<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <header>
    <h3>Part 3</h3><time datetime="2012-03-19 08:05:00">March 19, 2012</time>
  </header>

  <p>The previous installment of this series ended with our hero Mencius Moldbug, up to his waist (or worse) in the mephitic swamp of political incorrectness, approaching the dark heart of his politico-religious meditation on <em>How Dawkins Got Pwned</em>. Moldbug has caught Dawkins in the midst of a symptomatically significant, and excruciatingly sanctimonious, denunciation of Thomas Huxley’s racist “Victorian sentiments” – a sermon which concludes with the strange declaration that he is quoting Huxley’s words, despite their self-evident and wholly intolerable ghastliness, “only to illustrate how the <em>Zeitgeist</em> moves on.”</p>

  <p>Moldbug <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/10/how-dawkins-got-pwned-part-3.html">pounces</a>, asking pointedly: “What, exactly, is this Zeitgeist thing?” It is, indisputably, an extraordinary catch. Here is a thinker (Dawkins), trained as a biologist, and especially fascinated by the (disjunctively) twinned topics of naturalistic evolution and Abrahamic religion, stumbling upon what he apprehends as a one-way trend of world-historical spiritual development, which he then – emphatically, but without the slightest appeal to disciplined reason or evidence – denies has any serious connection to the advance of science, human biology, or religious tradition. The stammering nonsense that results is a thing of wonder, but for Moldbug it all makes sense:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>In fact, Professor Dawkins’ <em>Zeitgeist</em> is … indistinguishable from … the old Anglo-Calvinist or Puritan concept of <em>Providence</em>. Perhaps this is a false match. But it’s quite a close one.<br />
    <br />
    Another word for <em>Zeitgeist</em> is <em>Progress</em>. It’s unsurprising that Universalists tend to believe in Progress- in fact, in a political context, they often call themselves<em>progressives</em>. Universalism has indeed made quite a bit of progress since [the time of Huxley’s embarrassing remark in] 1913. But this hardly refutes the proposition that Universalism is a parasitic tradition. Progress for the tick is not progress for the dog.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>What, exactly, is this <em>Zeitgeist</em> thing? The question bears repeating. Is it not astounding, to begin with, that when one English Darwinian reaches for a weapon to club another, the most convenient cudgel to hand should be a German word — associated with an abstruse lineage of state-worshipping idealistic philosophy — explicitly referencing a conception of historical time that has no discernible connection to the process of naturalistic evolution? It is as if, scarcely imaginably, during a comparable contention among physicists (on the topic of quantum indeterminacy), one should suddenly hear it shouted that “God does not play dice with the universe.” In fact, the two examples are intimately entangled, since Dawkins’ faith in the <em>Zeitgeist</em> is combined with adherence to the dogmatic progressivism of ‘Einsteinian Religion’ (meticulously <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/09/how-dawkins-got-pwned-part-1.html">dissected</a>, of course, by Moldbug).</p>

  <p>The shamelessness is remarkable, or at least it would be, were it naively believed that the protocols of scientific rationality occupied sovereign position in such disputation, if only in principle. In fact – and here irony is amplified to the very brink of howling psychosis – Einstein’s Old One still reigns. The criteria of judgment owe everything to neo-puritan spiritual hygiene, and nothing whatsoever to testable reality. Scientific utterance is screened for conformity to a progressive social agenda, whose authority seems to be unaffected by its complete indifference to scientific integrity. It reminds Moldbug of Lysenko, for understandable reasons.</p>

  <p>“If the facts do not agree with the theory, so much worse for the facts” Hegel asserted. It is the<em>Zeitgeist</em> that is God, historically incarnated in the state, trampling mere data back into the dirt. By now, everybody knows where this ends. An egalitarian moral ideal, hardened into a universal axiom or increasingly incontestable dogma, completes modernity’s supreme historical irony by making ‘tolerance’ the iron criterion for the limits of (cultural) toleration. Once it is accepted universally, or, speaking more practically, by all social forces wielding significant cultural power, that <em>intolerance is intolerable</em>, political authority has legitimated anything and everything convenient to itself, without restraint.</p>

  <p>That is the magic of the dialectic, or of logical perversity. When only <em>tolerance is tolerable</em>, and everyone (who matters) accepts this manifestly nonsensical formula as not only rationally intelligible, but as the universally-affirmed principle of modern democratic faith, nothing except politics remains. Perfect tolerance and absolute intolerance have become logically indistinguishable, with either equally interpretable as the other, A = not-A, or the inverse, and in the nakedly Orwellian world that results, power alone holds the keys of articulation. Tolerance has progressed to such a degree that it has become a social police function, providing the existential pretext for new inquisitional institutions. (“We must remember that those who tolerate intolerance abuse tolerance itself, and an enemy of tolerance is an enemy of democracy,” Moldbug <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2011/07/petition-against-reactosphere.html">ironizes</a>.)</p>

  <p>The spontaneous tolerance that characterized classical liberalism, rooted in a modest set of strictly negative rights that restricted the domain of politics, or government intolerance, surrenders during the democratic surge-tide to a positive <em>right to be tolerated</em>, defined ever more expansively as substantial entitlement, encompassing public affirmations of dignity, state-enforced guarantees of equal treatment by all agents (public and private), government protections against non-physical slights and humiliations, economic subsidies, and – ultimately – statistically proportional representation within all fields of employment, achievement, and recognition. That the eschatological culmination of this trend is simply impossible matters not at all to the dialectic. On the contrary, it energizes the political process, combusting any threat of policy satiation in the fuel of infinite grievance. “I will not cease from Mental Fight, Nor shall my Sword sleep in my hand: Till we have built Jerusalem, In England’s green and pleasant land.” Somewhere before Jerusalem is reached, the inarticulate pluralism of a free society has been transformed into the assertive multiculturalism of a soft-totalitarian democracy.</p>

  <p>The Jews of 17th-century Amsterdam, or the Huguenots of 18th-century London, enjoyed the right to be left alone, and enriched their host societies in return. The democratically-empowered grievance groups of later modern times are incited by political leaders to demand a (fundamentally illiberal) <em>right to be heard</em>, with social consequences that are predominantly malignant. For politicians, however, who identify and promote themselves as the voice of the unheard and the ignored, the self-interest at stake could hardly be more obvious.</p>

  <p>Tolerance, which once presupposed neglect, now decries it, and in so doing becomes its opposite. Were this a partisan development, partisan politics of a democratic kind might sustain the possibility of reversion, but it is nothing of the kind. “When someone is hurting, government has got to move” declared ‘compassionate conservative’ US President George W. Bush, in a futile effort to channel the Cathedral. When the ‘right’ sounds like this it is not only dead, but unmistakably reeking of advanced decomposition. ‘Progress’ has won, but is that bad? Moldbug <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/10/how-dawkins-got-pwned-part-2.html">approaches</a> the question rigorously:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>If a tradition causes its hosts to make miscalculations that compromise their personal goals, it exhibits Misesian morbidity. If it causes its hosts to act in ways that compromise their genes’ reproductive interests, it exhibits Darwinian morbidity. If subscribing to the tradition is individually advantageous or neutral (defectors are rewarded, or at least unpunished) but collectively harmful, the tradition is parasitic. If subscribing is individually disadvantageous but collectively beneficial, the tradition is altruistic. If it is both individually and collectively benign, it is symbiotic. If it is both individually and collectively harmful, it is malignant. Each of these labels can be applied to either Misesian or Darwinian morbidity. A theme that is arational, but does not exhibit either Misesian or Darwinian morbidity, is trivially morbid.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Behaviorally considered, the Misesian and Darwinian systems are clusters of ‘selfish’ incentives, oriented respectively to property accumulation and gene propagation. Whilst the Darwinians conceive the ‘Misesian’ sphere as a special case of genetically self-interested motivation, the Austrian tradition, rooted in highly rationalized neo-kantian anti-naturalism, is pre-disposed to resist such reductionism. Whilst the ultimate implications of this contest are considerable, under current conditions it is a squabble of minor urgency, since both formations are united in ‘hate’, which is to say, in their reactionary tolerance for incentive structures that punish the maladapted.</p>

  <p>‘Hate’ is a word to pause over. It testifies with special clarity to the religious orthodoxy of the Cathedral, and its peculiarities merit careful notice. Perhaps its most remarkable feature is its perfect redundancy, when evaluated from the perspective of any analysis of legal and cultural norms that is not enflamed by neo-puritan evangelical enthusiasm. A ‘hate crime’, if it is anything at all, is just a crime, plus ‘hate’, and what the ‘hate’ adds is telling. To restrict ourselves, momentarily, to examples of uncontroversial criminality, one might ask: what is it exactly that <em>aggravates</em> a murder, or assault, if the motivation is attributed to ‘hate’? Two factors seem especially prominent, and neither has any obvious connection to common legal norms.</p>

  <p>Firstly, the crime is augmented by a purely ideational, ideological, or even ‘spiritual’ element, attesting not only to a violation of civilized conduct, but also to a heretical intention. This facilitates the complete abstraction of hate from criminality, whereupon it takes the form of ‘hate-speech’ or simply ‘hate’ (which is always to be contrasted with the ‘passion’, ‘outrage’, or righteous ‘anger’ represented by critical, controversial, or merely abusive language directed against unprotected groups, social categories, or individuals). ‘Hate’ is an offense against the Cathedral itself, a refusal of its spiritual guidance, and a mental act of defiance against the manifest religious destiny of the world.</p>

  <p>Secondly, and relatedly, ‘hate’ is deliberately and even strategically asymmetrical in respect to the equilibrium political polarity of advanced democratic societies. Between the relentless march of progress and the ineffective grouching of conservatism it does not vacillate. As we have seen, only the right can ‘hate’. As the doxological immunity system of ‘hate’ suppression is consolidated within elite educational and media systems, the highly selective distribution of protections ensures that ‘discourse’ – especially empowered discourse – is ratcheted consistently to the left, which is to say, in the direction of an ever more comprehensively radicalized Universalism. The morbidity of this trend is extreme.</p>

  <p>Because grievance status is awarded as political compensation for economic incompetence, it constructs an automatic cultural mechanism that advocates for dysfunction. The Universalist creed, with its reflex identification of inequality with injustice, can conceive no alternative to the proposition that the lower one’s situation or status, the more compelling is one’s claim upon society, the purer and nobler one’s cause. Temporal failure is the sign of spiritual election (Marxo-Calvinism), and to dispute any of this is clearly ‘hate’.</p>

  <p>This does not compel even the most hard-hearted neo-reactionary to suggest, in a caricature of the high Victorian cultural style, that social disadvantage, as manifested in political violence, criminality, homelessness, insolvency, and welfare dependency, is a simple index of moral culpability. In large part – perhaps overwhelmingly large part – it reflects sheer misfortune. Dim, impulsive, unhealthy, and unattractive people, reared chaotically in abusive families, and stranded in broken, crime-wracked communities, have every reason to curse the gods before themselves. Besides, disaster can strike anyone.</p>

  <p>In regards to effective incentive structures, however, none of this is of the slightest importance. Behavioral reality knows only one iron law: <strong>Whatever is subsidized is promoted</strong>. With a necessity no weaker than that of entropy itself, insofar as social democracy seeks to soften bad consequences – for major corporations no less than for struggling individuals or hapless cultures — things get worse. There is no way around, or beyond this formula, only wishful thinking, and complicity with degeneration. Of course, this defining reactionary insight is doomed to inconsequence, since it amounts to the supremely unpalatable conclusion that every attempt at ‘progressive’ improvement is fated to reverse itself, ‘perversely’, into horrible failure. No democracy could accept this, which means that every democracy will fail.</p>

  <p>The excited spiral of Misesian-Darwinian degenerative runaway is neatly captured in the <a href="http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/04/europe-8217-s-real-crisis/8915/">words</a> of the world’s fluffiest Beltway libertarian, Megan McArdle, writing in core Cathedral-mouthpiece <em>The Atlantic</em>:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>It is somewhat ironic that the first serious strains caused by Europe’s changing demographics are showing up in the Continent’s welfare budgets, because the pension systems themselves may well have shaped, and limited, Europe’s growth. The 20th century saw international adoption of social-security systems that promised defined benefits paid out of future tax revenue—known to pension experts as “paygo” systems, and to critics as Ponzi schemes. These systems have greatly eased fears of a destitute old age, but multiple studies show that as social-security systems become more generous (and old age more secure), people have fewer children. By one estimate, 50 to 60 percent of the difference between America’s (above-replacement) birthrate and Europe’s can be explained by the latter’s more generous systems. In other words, Europe’s pension system may have set in motion the very demographic decline that helped make that system—and some European governments—insolvent.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Despite McArdle’s ridiculous suggestion that the United States of America has in some way exempted itself from Europe’s mortuary path, the broad outline of the diagnosis is clear, and increasingly accepted as commonsensical (although best ignored). According to the rising creed, welfare attained through progeny and savings is non-universal, and thus morally-benighted. It should be supplanted, as widely and rapidly as possible, by universal benefits or ‘positive rights’ distributed universally to the democratic citizen and thus, inevitably, routed through the altruistic State. If as a result, due to the irredeemable political incorrectness of reality, economies and populations should collapse in concert, at least it will not damage our souls. Oh democracy! You saccharine-sweet dying idiot, what do you think the zombie hordes will care for your soul?</p>

  <p>Moldbug <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/10/how-dawkins-got-pwned-part-3.html">comments</a>:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Universalism, in my opinion, is best described as a mystery cult of power.</p>

    <p>It’s a cult of power because one critical stage in its replicative lifecycle is a little critter called the State. When we look at the big U’s surface proteins, we notice that most of them can be explained by its need to capture, retain, and maintain the State, and direct its powers toward the creation of conditions that favor the continued replication of Universalism. It’s as hard to imagine Universalism without the State as malaria without the mosquito.<br />
    <br />
    It’s a mystery cult because it displaces theistic traditions by replacing metaphysical superstitions with philosophical mysteries, such as humanity, progress, equality, democracy, justice, environment, community, peace, etc.<br />
    <br />
    None of these concepts, as defined in orthodox Universalist doctrine, is even slightly coherent. All can absorb arbitrary mental energy without producing any rational thought. In this they are best compared to Plotinian, Talmudic, or Scholastic nonsense.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>As a bonus, here’s the Urban Feature guide to the main sequence of modern political regimes:</p>

  <p><strong>Regime(1):</strong> Communist Tyranny<br />
  <strong>Typical Growth:</strong> ~0%<br />
  <strong>Voice / Exit:</strong> Low / Low<br />
  <strong>Cultural climate:</strong> Pyschotic utopianism<br />
  <strong>Life is …</strong> hard but ‘fair’<br />
  <strong>Transition mechanism:</strong> Re-discovers markets at economic degree-zero</p>

  <p><strong>Regime(2):</strong> Authoritarian Capitalism<br />
  <strong>Typical Growth:</strong> 5-10%<br />
  <strong>Voice / Exit:</strong> Low / High<br />
  <strong>Cultural climate:</strong> Flinty realism<br />
  <strong>Life is …</strong> hard but productive<br />
  <strong>Transition mechanism:</strong> Pressurized by the Cathedral to democratize</p>

  <p><strong>Regime(3):</strong> Social Democracy<br />
  <strong>Typical Growth:</strong> 0-3%<br />
  <strong>Voice / Exit:</strong> High / High<br />
  <strong>Cultural climate:</strong> Sanctimonious dishonesty<br />
  <strong>Life is …</strong> soft and unsustainable<br />
  <strong>Transition mechanism:</strong> Can-kicking runs out of road</p>

  <p><strong>Regime(4):</strong> Zombie Apocalypse<br />
  <strong>Typical Growth:</strong> N/A<br />
  <strong>Voice / Exit:</strong> High (mostly useless screaming) / High (with fuel, ammo, dried food, precious metal coins)<br />
  <strong>Cultural climate:</strong> Survivalism<br />
  <strong>Life is …</strong> hard-to-impossible<br />
  <strong>Transition mechanism:</strong> Unknown</p>

  <p>For all regimes, growth expectations assume moderately competent population, otherwise go straight to (4).</p>

  <footer>
    <hr />
    Original Article: <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20120723151556/http://www.thatsmags.com/shanghai/article/1920/the-dark-enlightenment-part-3">https://web.archive.org/web/20120723151556/http://www.thatsmags.com/shanghai/article/1920/the-dark-enlightenment-part-3</a>
  </footer>
</body>
</html>
