<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <header>
    <h3>Gender! And Now That I Have Your Attention, Let’s Talk About Sex</h3>
  </header>

  <p>So the two things Reactionaries like to complain about all the time are race and sex, and since we have <i>more</i> then gone overboard with our lengthy diversion into race, we might as well take a quick look at sex.</p>

  <p>As far as I know, even the Reactionaries who are really into biological differences between races don’t claim that women are intellectually inferior to men. I don’t even think they necessarily believe there are biological differences between the two groups. And yet they are not really huge fans of feminism. Why?</p>

  <p>Let’s start with some studies comparing gender roles and different outcomes.</p>

  <p><a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/26/business/26leonhardt.html">Surveys of women show</a> that they were on average happier fifty years ago than they are today. In fact, in the 1950s, women generally self-reported higher happiness than men; today, men report significantly higher happiness than women. So the history of the past fifty years – a history of more and more progressive attitudes toward gender – have been a history of women gradually becoming worse and worse off relative to their husbands and male friends.</p>

  <p>This doesn’t <i>necessarily</i> condemn progressivism, but as the ancient proverb goes, it sure waggles its eyebrows suggestively and gestures furtively while mouthing ‘look over there’.</p>

  <p>To confirm, we would want to look within a single moment in time: that is, are feminist women with progressive gender roles <i>today</i> less happy than their traditionalist peers? The answer <a href="http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/the_highbrow/2006/03/desperate_feminist_wives.html">appears to be yes</a>.</p>

  <p>Amusingly, because we <i>do</i> still live in a society where these things couldn’t be published unless someone took a progressivist tack, the New York Times article quoted above ends by saying the <i>real</i> problem is that men are jerks who don’t do their share of the housework.</p>

  <p>But when we actually study this, we find that <a href="http://www.twirlit.com/2012/10/02/study-says-sharing-housework-leads-to-divorce-feminists-wield-brooms-in-rage/">progressive marriages in which men and women split housework equally are 50% more likely to end in divorce</a> than traditional marriages where the women mostly take care of it. The same is true of working outside the home: progressive marriages where both partners work <a href="http://www.law.asu.edu/files/Programs/Sci-Tech/Commentaries/ellman_divorcerates.pdf">are more likely to end in divorce</a> than traditional marriages where the man works and the woman stays home.</p>

  <p>Maybe this is just because the same people who are progressive enough to defy traditional gender roles are also the same people who are progressive enough not to think divorce is a sin? But this seems unlikely: in general religious people get divorced <i>more</i> than the irreligious. And since I did promise we’d be talking about sex, consider the studies showing people in traditional marriages have <a href="http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2270399/Couples-stick-gender-roles-home-sex-20-times-year.html">better sex lives</a> than their feminist and progressive friends. This doesn’t seem like something that could easily be explained merely by religion, unless religion has gotten <i>way</i> cooler since the last time I attended synagogue.</p>

  <p>So why is this? I have heard some reactionaries say that although there are not intellectual differences between men and women, there are emotional differences, and that women are (either for biological or cultural reasons) more “submissive” to men’s “dominant” – and a quick search of the BDSM community seems to both to validate the general rule and to showcase some very striking exceptions.</p>

  <p>But my money would be on a simpler hypothesis. Every marriage involves conflict. The traditional concept of gender contains two roles that are divided in a time-tested way to minimize conflict as much as possible. In a perfect-spherical-cow sense, either the husband or the wife could step into either role, and it would still work just as well. But since men have been socialized for one role since childhood, and women socialized for the other role, it seems that in most cases the easiest solution is to stick them in the one they’ve been trained for.</p>

  <p>We could also go with a third hypothesis: that <i>women aren’t actually bizarre aliens from the planet Zygra’ax with completely inexplicable preferences</i>. I mean, suppose you had the following two options:</p>

  <p>1. A job working from home, where you are your own boss. The job description is “spending as much or as little time as you want with your own children and helping them grow and adjust to the adult world.” (but Sister Y also has a post on <a href="http://theviewfromhell.blogspot.com/2013/02/single-income-no-kids-supernormal.html">the childless alternative</a> to this)</p>

  <p>2. A job in the office, where you do have a boss, and she wants you to get her the Atkins report “by yesterday” or she is going to throw your sorry ass out on the street where it belongs, and there <i>better</i> not be any complaints about it this time.</p>

  <p>Assume both jobs would give you exactly the same amount of social status and respect.</p>

  <p>Now assume that suddenly a bunch of people come along saying that <i>actually</i>, only losers pick Job 1 and surely you’re not a <i>loser</i>, are you? And you have to watch all your former Job 1 buddies go out and take Job 2 and be praised for this and your husband asks why <i>you</i> aren’t going into Job 2 and contributing something to the family finances for once, and eventually you just give in and go to Job 2, but also you’ve got to do large portions of Job 1, and also the extra income mysteriously fails to give your family any more money and <a href="http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2004/11/two-income-trap">in fact you are worse off financially than before</a>.</p>

  <p>Is it so hard to imagine that a lot of women would be less happy under this new scenario?</p>

  <p>Now of course (most) feminists very reasonably say that it’s Totally Okay If You Want To Stay Home And We’re Not Trying To Force Anyone. But let’s use the feminists’ own criteria on that one. Suppose Disney put out a series of movies in which they had lots of great female role models who only worked in the home and were subservient to their husbands all the time, and lauded them as <i>real</i> women who were courageous and awesome and sexy and not just poor oppressed stick-in-the-muds, and then at the end they flashed a brief message “But Of Course Working Outside The Home Is Totally Okay Also”. Do you think feminists would respond “Yeah, we have no problem with this, after all they <i>did</i> flash that message at the end”?</p>

  <p>Aside from being better for women, traditional marriages seem to have many other benefits. They allow someone to bring up the children so that they don’t have to spend their childhood in front of the television being socialized by reruns of <i>Drug-Using Hypersexual Gangsters With Machine Guns</i>. They ensure that at least one member of each couple has time to be doing things that every household should be doing anyway, like keeping careful track of finances, attending parent-teacher conferences, and keeping in touch with family.</p>

  <p>So do men need to force women to stay barefoot and in the kitchen all the time, and chase Marie Curie out of physics class so she can go home and bake for her husband?</p>

  <p>By this point you may be noticing a trend. No, we don’t need to do that. If we stopped optimizing the media to send feminist messages as loud as possible, if we stopped actively opposing any even slightly positive portrayal of a housewife as “sexist” and “behind the times”, and if we stopped having entire huge lobby groups supported vehemently by millions of people <i>dedicated entirely to making the problem worse</i>, then maybe things would take care of themselves.</p>

  <p>There’s some sort of metaphor here…something about dirt…or a shovel…nah, never mind.</p>
</body>
</html>
