<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>My friends at Amos &amp; Gromar wrote a little something on “<a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/11/05/making-neoreaction-simple/">Making Neoreaction Simple</a>.” This isn’t an entirely bad idea, as it shouldn’t be pretended that more than 2% of the world will ever be able to give an intellectually qualified assessment of neoreaction. Assuming an individual is unable or, more likely, unwilling to educate themselves of <a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/01/the-conceptual-tools-of-neoreactionary-study/">certain conceptual tools</a>, I don’t think it is possible to actually articulate anything essentially neoreactionary. In my book I postulate the possibility that a “true understanding of how society works” may not be accessible to anyone outside the ruling class, but that’s assuming a sane system in the first place.</p>

  <p>So if we suppose a typical individual asks me what neoreaction is about, say at the bar, where I know I don’t have the possibility to inculcate them in notions such as time preference, ideological superstructures, social construction, and so on, I think I would be left to give some “initial approximations” of what it means to be a neoreactionary, with the caveat that these are necessarily incomplete and can only represent one aspect of the whole in much the same way as the blind men grasp the fabled elephant. Conciseness and a reference to generally understood cultural groups will work best, with the intent that these might be entry points to beginning to understand the whole, but for those who will never deign to go on and do this, these at least won’t be harmful understandings. So without further ado, I might propose these approximations of neoreaction:</p>

  <p><em>Libertarians who have given up on democracy, because democracy gave up on them.</em></p>

  <p><em>Conservatives who got tired of losing.</em></p>

  <p><em>Conservatives who hate the Republican party more than the Democratic party.</em></p>

  <p><em>Race realists who want to be left alone rather than have any notions of “racial equality” or “diversity” imposed on them or anyone else.</em></p>

  <p><em>Anarcho-capitalists who can see a use for the state in a society that isn’t smart enough to handle anarcho-capitalism.</em></p>

  <p><em>Monarchists who understand votes are bullets in a low intensity civil war.</em></p>

  <p><em>Social theorists who want to make human nature a feature, not a bug, in the system.</em></p>

  <p><em>Men who see that feminism makes us work against our biological programming which makes us miserable.</em></p>

  <p><em>Christians who want your progressive religion out of their homes, schools, and businesses.</em></p>

  <p>Those are some approximations based on group identities, how should certain tenets be stated? I think the tenets are going to have to assume a better willingness to grapple with the theory, so if we suppose an individual is willing to think out what the above approximations mean, I would propose these initial articulations of our tenets, without supposing this is a complete list or that all neoreactionaries agree with the proposition theoretically or emphatically.</p>

  <ol>
    <li>Civilization does not happen by accident.</li>

    <li>Expect consequences, some which you won’t like, when you mess with the way things have always been done.</li>

    <li>If something’s always been done a certain way, you’re better trying to figure out a reason why such a norm is stabilizing.</li>

    <li>The existence and concentration of power cannot be eliminated; don’t waste your time trying to do so.</li>

    <li>High degrees of power asymmetry tend to be stable.</li>

    <li>Individuals must be socialized into their autonomy and independence.</li>

    <li>Freedom imposes responsibilities, and the inability to exercise those responsibilities should entail a limiting of that freedom.</li>

    <li>The innate qualities of human individuals explains a lot about society.</li>

    <li>It is better to benefit the group than the individuals of that group.</li>

    <li>Social structures instrumentally transform human nature into social capital.</li>

    <li>Don’t fight human nature, make it work for you.</li>

    <li>Justice is equality, and no one is the same.</li>

    <li>There are no “rights,” only what you’re afforded by society.</li>

    <li>If you won’t let someone lose, you won’t let society win.</li>

    <li>Social roles should be adopted for the benefit of most, not eliminated for the benefit of a few.</li>
  </ol>

  <p>I imagine many will want to contribute other approximations. Keep in mind these aren’t meant to be a list of conclusions per se, i.e. “Traditional gender roles are good,” but principles which neoreactionaries respect in their attempt to understand society and how it works.</p>
</body>
</html>
