<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <div class="main">
    <p>As the Enlightenment began with the premise that man is a rational animal and the post-Enlightenment began with the premise that man is an irrational animal, so begins the Dark Enlightenment with the premise that man is a social animal—and this beginning, one must hope, heralds the birth of the <em>meta-Enlightenment</em>, the extension of the realm of the movement that booted reflexivity to encompass not only the world but also<em>itself</em>, drawing into question the premises of not only the enemy memeplex to be outcompeted but also the new outcompetitor sprung Dionysus-like from the thigh of the old. This shows the importance of the reference-point of Chinese philosophy referenced obliquely by Mencius Moldbug (who then proceeded, in true libertarian fashion, to ignore the question) and explicitly by myself: they began not with the answer of rationality, but—note that Douglas Adams continues to be the prophet of our time—with the corresponding <em>question</em>. The fundamental difference between Mencius and Xunzi is that the former held that human nature was good and the latter held that it was bad; both proceeded accordingly from there, but the philosophical tradition, unlike ours, was at least conscious that the question must be asked.</p>

    <p>So. Man is a social animal. Enlightenment philosophers, believing themselves to be <em>atoms of reason</em>, still functioned according to the social laws of man. National Socialism has its roots not only in the masses of the unenlightened, but also in Fichte, the Kantian. But what are these laws? I have referred to a certain subset of them before as <em>group dynamics</em>: the rules governing individual affiliation to the superindividual, to <em>ingroups</em>, and individual disaffiliation with the superindividuals contrary to their own, with <em>outgroups</em>. But these terms are derivationally clumsy: to derive the necessary terminology from them would result in weighty, awkward polysyllabisms of the sort that would make even an amateur black magician shudder in disgust; and the true wizard notices that group dynamics are <a href="http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=wretch">embedded</a> in the Germanic languages themselves, as I have previously <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/05/voice-exit-and-the-catholic-question/">noted</a>.</p>

    <p>Language is a clumsy weapon, but in the hands of an expert wielder it can be made slightly less so. Instead of ingroups and outgroups—certainly instead of <em>tribes</em>, which do not allow us so much as a descriptor for the foreign—we can speak of <em>thedes</em> and <em>elthedes.</em></p>

    <p>What is a thede? Definitions of the prerationally grasped can only be imperfect, but to begin, a thede is a superindividual grouping that its constituent individuals feel affiliation with and (therefore?) positive estimates of.</p>

    <blockquote>
      <p><a href="http://www.racebending.com/v3/interviews/rebecca-bigler-developmental-psychologist/">What I’m famous for</a> is the experiment where we put some kids in red shirts others in blue shirts. It doesn’t take a lot, but after a few environmental messages, then the blue shirts think they’re better than red shirts, and red shirts think they are better than blue shirts—even though they’re exactly the same shirt otherwise. Human beings can have a bias: ‘Whatever group I’m in is better than yours…’”</p>
    </blockquote>

    <p>Thedes are defined by their thede identity, their <em>thedishness</em>, and in opposition to <em>elthedishness</em>; but these are not two separate phenomena, but one with multiple facets. Brahmins are intellectual—but intellectual <em>unlike Vaisyas and Dalits</em>. Vaisyas are hard-working—but hard-working <em>unlike Brahmins and Dalits</em>. Dalits are fun-loving—but fun-loving <em>unlike Brahmins and Vaisyas</em>.</p>

    <p>Thedes are <em>multiple</em>: one does not simply affiliate with one thede, but with an overlapping mishmash of thedes of different and shifting priorities—and some thedes are <em>concentric</em>. A guy from western Tennessee once said to me that, when he’s in a bar at home, he’ll get along with the guy from western Tennesee and fight the guy from eastern Tennessee; when he’s in a bar in eastern Tennessee, he’ll get along with the guy from Tennessee and fight the guy from Georgia; and when he’s in a bar in Alabama, he’ll get along with the guy from Georgia and fight the guy from Vermont.</p>

    <p>Thedes can form along multiple lines: one can simultaneously be thedishly from western Tennessee (and then Tennessee, the South, America…), thedishly an analytic philosopher (and then a philosopher, an academic, a Brahmin…), thedishly a fan of black metal (and then metal, non-mainstream music…), and so on.</p>

    <p>Thede identity can be reinforced in many ways: important examples include participating in thedish activities, bashing elthedes and their members, throwing exosemantic gang signs, and attacking the use of elthedish exosemantic gang signs. As I said on Twitter long ago:</p>

    <blockquote>
      <p>Feminists are often empirically wrong about the meaning and use of ‘slurs’, but meaning and use aren’t the point of their policing. It’s about exosemantic gang signs. You can’t be One Of Us and call people cunts. Perhaps linguistic taboos can be seen in terms of group dynamics in general.</p>
    </blockquote>

    <p>Exosemantic gang signs? Exosemantic gang signs! We can simplify and call them… I’m not sure what. My first inclination is to say <em>tokens</em> and <em>eltokens</em>; I hate overloading existing words, but I’ve got nothing better, so I’ll go with it for now. (Does anyone have anything? It looks like all the Germanic roots that could be useful have given existing English words. I could use <em><a href="http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/montri#Esperanto">mantra</a></em> and <em>elmantra</em>, but that’s even worse. I could try to derive something from δείχνω or σημάδι, but that might not work. <em><a href="http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/semn#Romanian">Semn</a></em> retains the link to ‘semiotics’ at the heavy cost of openness to unfortunate puns and typos. <em><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiotics#Terminology">Semeion</a></em> is almost as bad, and recalls the Russian name Семён, which USG, in its wisdom, anglicizes to… well, you know. Latin borrowing patterns would give <em>semium,</em>which sounds like half of a chemical. <em>Code</em> is just bad. Another possibility is <em><a href="http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%D7%90%D7%95%D7%AA">oth</a>,</em> which allows for puns on “oath” and the homophone “auth” (as in authentication), but looks weird and requires drawing from a language that doesn’t borrow well into English. Black magic is hard!)</p>

    <p>What is a token? A token is, obviously, a <em>gang sign</em>, a thedish unit of communication; but what is this “exosemantic”?</p>

    <blockquote>
      <p><a href="http://kconrod.wordpress.com/2012/08/08/apologies-to-twitter-philologists/">exosemantic</a> – the part of a word or statement that isn’t its strict entailments, but which are extremely common implicatures– specifically, these shouldn’t be contextual or Gricean implicatures, but socially bound ones, which have been formed by continued use of the word in particular contexts, or by particular speakers. The exosemantics of a word may eventually become incorporated into the defining entailments.</p>

      <p>There should be a correlate, endosemantic, but this would simply be the lexical entailments of a word, so I don’t know that we need a new word for that.</p>
    </blockquote>

    <p>It is commonly known that words carry meaning on two levels: <em>denotation</em>, or strict, dictionary-level meaning, and <em>connotation</em>, or emotional association; but there is a third, <em>exosemantic</em> level. The word “eldritch”, for example, denotes otherworldliness and connotes a feeling of cosmic horror toward its referent; but it also exosemantically implies that its user has read Lovecraft. The word “liberty” is no different from the word “freedom’, The word “praxis” is no different from a certain definition of the word “practice” except in its exosemantic layer: “praxis” is <em>heavy;</em> “praxis” implies familiarity with—<em>association</em> with—the academic tradition that uses the word “praxis”.</p>

    <p>Heavy? Heavy. And dense.</p>

    <blockquote>
      <p><a href="http://kconrod.wordpress.com/2012/08/08/apologies-to-twitter-philologists/">volume</a> – the phonetic, syntactic, and morphological space that a word occupies. A very “long” word is one with a lot of syllables, a very “tall” word is one with a lot of morphemes.</p>

      <p>mass – the semantic, pragmatic, and social impact of a word. A very “heavy” word has not only a lot of specific entailments, but may also have a lot of socially linked implicatures that are strongly bound to the word itself or to its use in certain contexts.</p>

      <p>density = mass/volume. A very dense word is one with a low volume and a heavy mass. A very non-dense word is one with a high volume but very little mass.</p>
    </blockquote>

    <p>Heavy words are likely tokens, and repeating tokens reinforces thede identity. Some tokens are <em>identifiers,</em> markers of identity that one can apply to oneself; identifying oneself with these tokens also reinforces thede identity. (Tumblr about-mes are the thede-identification equivalent of heroin.) Stating the thedish position on a certain issue also reinforces thede identity, and is indistinguishable to <em>at least</em> the untrained from rational thought.</p>

    <p>It should be obvious from this that <a href="http://lesswrong.com/lw/gt/a_fable_of_science_and_politics/">politics is the mind-killer</a>. Political ideologies are thedish identifiers; political positions are tokens; political debate is thede conflict and reinforcement. To even answer the question “what are you politically?” is to reinforce a previously determined thedish identity.</p>

    <p>Hence anarcho-fascism. <em>(Update 7/11/13: But of course some idiots had to go off and use that and mean it, so I can’t use it anymore.)</em></p>
  </div><!--EndFragment-->
</body>
</html>
