<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>The material conditions of society are one of the most powerful influences on public opinion, especially if positive material conditions can be linked to the effects of whatever ideology you’re hawking. If A -&gt; B; B; Therefore, A. They’re none the wiser, anyway.</p>

  <p>A friend of mine recently noted that people tend to radically shift towards fiscal conservatism when they actually have real budgets and don’t get to play around frivolously with daddy’s credit card. But aside from the flow of cash inward is the flow of cash outward in the form of taxes. There’s an underlying truth to the oft-heard claim that conservatism is developmental based on age. And the idea is that an increase in age decreases the probability that you’ll be able to sheltered from baseline of reality. At some point, you’re pushed out of the nest and have to fly. When you’ve been sailing on daddy’s back, it’s easy to play the liberal.</p>

  <p>This phenomenon is an excellent indicator of society’s preference towards concreteness over abstractness, and indeed, its almost inability to properly deal with abstract concepts–that is, arriving at positions at least semi-independent of material conditions (by definition, complete independence from material conditions is probably impossible). That they need concreteness and personal experience for them to switch views demonstrates their lack of ability for abstract thought.</p>

  <p>The masses count on concrete, personal experience. This is the best explanation for why there’s zero motivation for revolution when the economic conditions appear to be skyrocketing, leading to pretensions arising about the inevitability of the upward trend of the economy. It’s at this point that all other issues are side-lined. Cultural, social, political, spiritual, and psychological . It follows that in order to radically reorganize the fabric of society, it’s necessary to ensure that the Volk have bread on their tables. Lots of it. A long enough, albeit temporary, increase in economic conditions functions like wool being pulled over the eyes of the public. Now you see it, now you don’t. Likewise, the transposition of this is that if economic conditions are hard, then that constitutes a modification of the concrete, which seems to be a reliable indicator that revolutionary sentiments are ripe for stirring up, to mix metaphors.</p>

  <p>If the concrete is modified, then the scales once encrusted on their eyes dry up, crack, and blow away, leading to the unfamiliar and painful effect of bright light–almost like when the light in a room is turned on after a while of being on. There’s a split-second where everyone groans, but then their eyes quickly readjust.</p>

  <p>A focus on concreteness and abstractness explains the resurgence of forces which constitute real opposition to the previously unchallenged hegemony of the Eurocrats. Failing material conditions has given momentum to the radical right in Europe, especially in Greece, where it’s hit the hardest, which is, of course, no coincidence. That connection is intimately established by the literature on the relationship between economic conditions and radical political movements. People can only be reached when the scales fall, even if at the same time they’re handed new scales. They mistakenly think they’re seeing light for the first time, even if it’s just been given a slightly different tinge than the previous scales permitted.</p>

  <p>That’s right: the political opportunists that take advantage of the situation have often times correctly diagnosed at least part of the problem, even if the solutions peddled are woefully inadequate and ultimately destructive.</p>

  <p>But when did correctness matter? Belief matters more.</p>

  <p>So the popularity of neoreaction is on an upswing, and it will continue to surge forward, bringing in those whose concreteness dominates abstractness, and vice-versa. The latter make better thinkers. They dominate in meta over mechanics. The ‘concreters’ change when they’re hit personally. Bayesian priors are ‘upset’ when there’s no warrant for them to be modified, but that’s just how folks operate, isn’t it?</p>

  <p>Libertarians are conservatives who were fucked by the state. There’s a ring of truth in this one, as well. All it took was one oh-so-personal and oh-so-concrete encounter with the IRS for them to snap out of state worship directed towards a state that is bent on their destruction. Was that sufficient enough evidence to modify their view? No, I’ve noted this before in my series on rhetoric. It isn’t enough at all, but it provides that skepticism, that anger, that motivation, and the crucial fact that offenses to personal property last almost as long–if not longer–than the death of one’s parents.</p>

  <p>The real test of meta is whether or not the realization and correction of state-worship happened in the absence of a change in material conditions. But it almost always can be brought down and reduced to a single zenith, and this invariably affects the academy, as well. Rather than being less susceptible, it might even be the case that the academy is more susceptible to herd mentality.</p>

  <p>Most of them have complexes stemming all the way back to social relations in high school–relations that they’ve never really fully recovered from. The need to separate oneself from the opinions of one’s fellow bone-headed high-school colleagues motivates the acceptance of positions that are radically against common-sense, if only because those same positions are held by the stereotypically dumb.</p>

  <p>Dumb people believe X. Smart people believe Y. Really smart people believe X.</p>

  <p>Academics, on average, fall either in the first or second category. Consensus whoring is what they’re best at; the acceptance of *new* and *radical* ideas is limited to ideas that operate within the current paradigm. But challenge the paradigm, and you’re rendered a pariah: You’re religiously motivated. You’re politically motivated. You’re motivated by money.</p>

  <p>Projection? That sounds like a fairly accurate sketch of contemporary leftism. Having abandoned religion, they’ve–wait–they never actually abandoned religion; they substituted one form for another: Removing the veneer, but maintaining the underlying suppositions of Puritan Christianity–this is clearest, of course, in the U.S.</p>

  <p>This piece sounds Marxist. It is, in a sense–not because the Communist Manifesto was correct, but because part of the original analysis was. Analysis is one thing, prescriptions another. That being said, because Marxism entails both analysis and prescription, it’s impossible to say that this piece is either Marxist, or that I’m a Marxist myself. For the fallacy mongers, that’s the undistributed middle for you.</p>

  <p>Whatever meets the psychological needs of the aggregate <em>for a particular equilibrium</em> takes precedence. It’s almost unstoppable. When the equilibrium changes, the opportunity is ripe for intra-marginal benefits to be exploited. Naomi Klein is a fraud, a liar, and a cunt, but the term she coined ‘Shock Doctrine,’ isn’t a bad term to describe this.</p>

  <p>Democrats produce democrats. Republicans produce republicans. Unless, of course, psychological needs intrinsic to that particular person aren’t being met, at which point they’ll switch over and rationalize objections away. This is why when individual X converts from position A to position B, all talk about persuading him back to A is actually <em>physically noxious</em>. It provokes a physiological response of pain and disgust and negative associations, and so he ridicules, mocks, rages, and in general is very spiteful about it. And he refuses to address any of it properly–that is, unless, fire is combated with fire.</p>

  <p>That’s why atheists have daddy issues. Most aren’t atheists because they’re *such objective wow* but because they weren’t able to fit into their religious peer groups owing to certain personality conflicts, and/or their father was abusive or overbearing in some way.</p>

  <p>Dialogue can only take place after the superiority complex is destroyed quickly and efficiently.</p>

  <p>This operates on both the aggregate and the individual level. On the individual level, it’s usually a function of personality, which is mostly a function of genetics, but is also influenced by the environment, in addition to <em>economic and ideological environment</em>. This would almost be self-referentially incoherent if I didn’t previously make the distinction between the concrete and the abstract. It’s possible to break out and ‘go meta,’ even if only a small segment of the population can do it, but even that statistically minute population can’t extricate itself from its own genetics. Ideology and environment is one thing, genetics another. Epigenetics is a thing, sure, but it’s not as flexible as immediate change in ideology and the environment are.</p>

  <p>YOU JUST THINK X BECAUSE YOU GREW UP IN CIRCUMSTANCES Y.</p>

  <p>Maybe, but that (1) doesn’t invalidate X (genetic fallacy, foo), and (2) doesn’t necessitate that you think X because of circumstances Y. Projection. Unless the person offering that statement is unusually bright, it’s really a matter of them projecting their own lack of agency onto you.</p>

  <p>The central reason for constructing the model like so is because of repeated inference to the best explanations for why the aggregate radically switches its ideological commitments with a *coincidental* shift in the material conditions of society. The best explanation is that the concrete and the abstract are not distributed uniformly, and that they’re only distributed to a minority.</p>

  <p>And now you know…the rest of the story.</p>
</body>
</html>
