<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>It may seem absurd to ask how democracy can fail. As we all know and are constantly reminded, democracy is the best form of government; or at least, in the words of Winston Churchill, the worst except for all the others. The New York Times <a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/10/opinion/10tue1.html?_r=2&amp;hpw&amp;">tells us</a> that “the more people who have access to the ballot, the better the country will be”, and the Washington Post <a href="http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-03-17/opinions/37795516_1_arizona-voter-id-law-national-voter-registration-act-registration-laws-and-procedures">says</a> that voting is our “most essential right”. Surely, you may think, only a crackpot would claim that democracy doesn’t work!</p>

  <p>But the New York Times has been wrong before. Walter Duranty, one of the most famous foreign affairs reporters in American history, used his post at the Times to <a href="http://www.ukemonde.com/duranty/">regurgitate Stalinist propaganda</a> and <a href="http://www.holodomor.org.uk/Journalists/Walter_Duranty.aspx">cover up the Holodomor</a>, and thus won not only the Pulitzer Prize but also the Order of Lenin. If the Times could not be trusted about Communism, why should it be trusted about democracy?</p>

  <p>Consider also the positions of the Founding Fathers. Not only did they clearly refuse to make America a democracy, they had a low opinion of it in the abstract, for reasons most eloquently stated by John Adams:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Democracy has never been and never can be so durable as aristocracy or monarchy; but while it lasts, it is more bloody than either. … Remember, democracy never lasts long. It soon wastes, exhausts, and murders itself. There never was a democracy yet that did not commit suicide. It is in vain to say that democracy is less vain, less proud, less selfish, less ambitious, or less avaricious than aristocracy or monarchy. It is not true, in fact, and nowhere appears in history. Those passions are the same in all men, under all forms of simple government, and when unchecked, produce the same effects of fraud, violence, and cruelty.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>If only a crackpot would oppose democracy, John Adams is a crackpot. John Adams was not a crackpot. Perhaps the thing needs a closer look.</p>

  <p>The word ‘democracy’ as it is understood today refers to the practice of giving citizens—and, in its more advanced stages, <a href="http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2012-03-14/local/35449488_1_takoma-park-noncitizens-vote-campaign">others</a>—the right to vote. It is unique to the democratic form of government that the activist may pursue his agenda by <em>democratic means</em> — that is, by increasing the percentage of voters who agree with him. This statement of democratic means conjures up images of the door-to-door campaigner or grassroots protester holding a sign on a street corner; but these are by no means the only possible strategies.</p>

  <p>It is an observable fact of American political life that <a href="http://swampland.time.com/2013/04/04/a-license-to-vote-gop-lawmakers-push-voter-ids/">the Republican Party supports voter ID laws</a> and <a href="http://www.democrats.org/about/voting_rights_institute">the Democratic Party opposes them</a>; furthermore, while many Republicans follow the Democrats in believing that the borders ought to be opened, support for a lower immigration rate is far more likely to be found in the former party than the latter. Out of the 235 recent Congressmen who received a <a href="https://www.numbersusa.com/content/my/tools/grades/list/0/RECENT/US/A/Grade/Active">grade</a> above C from the immigration restrictionist group <a href="https://www.numbersusa.com/">NumbersUSA</a>, only nine—less than four percent—are Democrats. Why is this?</p>

  <p>In a word: democracy.</p>

  <p>Democratic power is measured in terms of percentages of the voting population. It is often thought that the only way to gain power within a democracy is to win over more voters; but this assumes that the voting population must remain constant—an assumption that the existence of immigration and naturalization policy proves to be false. This is the strategy Bertolt Brecht outlined in his poem <em><a href="http://mrzine.monthlyreview.org/2006/brecht140806.html">The Solution</a></em>:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>After the uprising of the 17th June<br />
    The Secretary of the Writer’s Union<br />
    Had leaflets distributed in the Stalinallee<br />
    Stating that the people<br />
    Had forfeited the confidence of the government<br />
    And could win it back only<br />
    By redoubled efforts. Would it not be easier<br />
    In that case for the government<br />
    To dissolve the people<br />
    And elect another?</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>There is no Secretary of the Writer’s Union dropping leaflets in <em>Mittelamerika,</em> but the people have nonetheless forfeited the confidence of the government. <em><a href="http://www.salon.com/2012/03/04/whats_the_matter_with_white_people/">What’s the matter with White people?</a></em> The “matter with White people”, the ‘problem’ that <a href="http://theden.tv/?p=81">Brahmins</a> like Joan Walsh see with Middle America, is that Middle America is irredeemably Middle-American: it votes Republican, opposes open borders, and generally shows no signs of becoming<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montgomery_County,_Maryland">Montgomery County</a>. If there’s one thing Montgomery County hates, it’s that Whites who do not act like they were born and raised in Montgomery County have even a semblance of political power. Every rear-guard action by Middle America, from the Tea Party movement to a pastor burning a Qur'an, is cause for endless derision from the Brahmin elite. Thus the Solution.</p>

  <p>Since the voting population does not remain constant, it can be politically manipulated. On the right, there is the <a href="http://www.vdare.com/articles/the-sailer-strategy-updated-three-steps-to-save-america">Sailer Strategy</a>. Steve Sailer acknowledged that “you want more of the kind of people likely to vote for your party in the country and fewer of the <a href="http://www.vdare.com/articles/memo-from-mexico-by-allan-wall-187">kind of people likely to vote for the other party</a>“, and developed a three-point strategy for democratic demographic warfare:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>First: the voters most likely to vote Republican are whites who are married with children. So you want your base to thrive.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Second: since the GOP is inevitably the white party, you want marginally white people from places like Latin America and South Asia to identify as white.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Third: you want to import fewer people who are likely to vote against your party.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The left, of course, has a <a href="http://www.politico.com/story/2013/04/immigration-reform-could-upend-electoral-college-90478.html">parallel strategy</a>.</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>The immigration proposal pending in Congress would transform the nation’s political landscape for a generation or more — pumping as many as 11 million new Hispanic voters into the electorate a decade from now in ways that, if current trends hold, would produce an electoral bonanza for Democrats and cripple Republican prospects in many states they now win easily.</p>

    <p>Beneath the philosophical debates about amnesty and border security, there are brass-tacks partisan calculations driving the thinking of lawmakers in both parties over comprehensive immigration reform, which in its current form offers a pathway to citizenship — and full voting rights — for a group of undocumented residents that roughly equals the population of Ohio, the nation’s seventh-largest state.</p>

    <p id="continue">If these people had been on the voting rolls in 2012 and voted along the same lines as other Hispanic voters did last fall, President Barack Obama’s relatively narrow victory last fall would have been considerably wider, a POLITICO analysis showed.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p><a href="http://www.thenation.com/blog/171093/bad-news-about-white-people-romney-won-white-vote-almost-everywhere#">The bad news about White people</a>, according to The Nation, is that they don’t vote for people who hate them and want them replaced. A comment there sums up the progressive mentality:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Love to see all the teabaggers still crying. Conservatives have now lost the poular <em>[sic]</em> vote 5 out of the last 6 elections. The country is becoming more and more diverse every year. More and more people are leaving the rural areas that are about as meaningless as you can get and moving to liberal cities where the centers of money are located. Add to that, as people become more educated they become more cultural and thats <em>[sic]</em> even more reason to move to a cosmopolitan city. Of which there are very few in teabagger states.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Despite their underdog posturing, progressives know they are in power. If the America of 2012 had the demographics of the America of 1980, <a href="http://www.amren.com/news/2012/11/demography-is-destiny/">Romney would have won</a> in a landslide larger than Reagan’s. Alas, it did not. Progressives know: demography is destiny. We who stand in opposition must also accept this—and act accordingly.</p>
</body>
</html>
