<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>The part is subordinate to the whole. Parts sometimes have to suffer for the sake of the whole. I want to give an example in–surprise–sex realism.</p>

  <p>To the extent that attribute X is exhibited far more readily by biological gender M (male), then that’s sufficient to term X a masculine attribute.</p>

  <p>Notice that this is about statistical regularity. It’s entirely possible for there to be outliers–outliers that are subject to gender norms that move against their innate predispositions. Some girls, in other words, are NTJs on the Myers-Briggs scale, a scale that I think is fairly accurate and useful. These girls honestly don’t have to ‘put anything on’. They just tend–by nature–to be more oriented and directed towards masculine activities. There isn’t anything wrong with that at all, since it’s certain that the distribution of masculine attributes for women will look very similar to a bell curve, in that those who genuinely exhibit these traits will be in the extreme minority, e.g. girls who like to play hockey. Farm girls. That’s the sort of thing I have in mind. They embody masculine attributes more than their counterparts.</p>

  <p>Attributes like honor and responsibility are technically capable of being had by women, as well. But those are masculine attributes, and so they’re more or less masculine to the extent that they participate or do not participate in them.</p>

  <p>If you’re a ditzy man, you’re exhibiting feminine attributes. Congruency is key. If it’s a put on, you’ll be shamed–and rightly so. If it’s not a put on, then you’ll be shamed–and rightly so. The part is subordinate to the whole. Even if it’s genuine, it’s important that these norms–on the aggregate–be maintained, and to attempt to inculcate scrutinizing faculties in the masses is a mistake (for them to be able to distinguish between genuine and non-genuine gender norm violation). Nuance is lost on the public. In fact, as I’ve mentioned previously, one of the crucial distinguishing factors of the herd is that they’re incapable of thinking beyond individual concrete examples. They do not and cannot think in terms of statistical distributions, bell curves, or engage in a high level of abstractness.</p>

  <p>They’re unable to accurately distinguish a proper violation of a norm from an improper violation of a gender norm, so it’s better that they err on the side of caution and shame <em>all</em>behaviors that fall outside of traditional gender norms, even if there are casualties.</p>

  <p>Even if a woman’s ambition and work-ethic is far superior to the average man, that serves no justification for the destruction of gender norms that discourage women from advancing and being successful in the workplace by competing with men. On the aggregate, such behaviors are destructive. Those particular females constitute casualties, but should be–for the most part–accepted by neoreactionaries, unless and until they attempt to bring down traditional norms.</p>

  <p>We have female outliers in the reactosphere. Does anyone really think Judgy Bitch isn’t an oddity, as far as the average female goes? The reason she’s able to take an abstract and distanced perspective on female behavior is because she’s sitting at a vantage point. She exhibits masculine tendencies of abstractness, rigor, and straight-forwardness, but also participates in the feminine, and so she’s able to deliver particularly insightful analyses of female behavior–analyses that sometimes surpass what other male bloggers are able to provide.This is why IQ distributions between genders itself is really quite irrelevant. It doesn’t matter if women tend to match men until the higher standard deviations. If women on average lack all these attributes, then the pairing of one man and one woman with the same IQ will result in the man intellectually winning out. And that’s because not only do women lack the attributes of abstractness, truth-seeking, and straight-forwardness, but because female solipsism deadens women to everything that they do not love.</p>

  <p>If they don’t love it, then they’re utterly indifferent to the worst suffering, unless a status game is involved. If they don’t love, then the attribute of ‘caring’ and ‘sympathy’ that women are very much known for–is completely culled. Solipsism entails that female virtues are conditional and contingent. And since solipsism makes the mind blind, the average woman is unfit to govern, vis-a-vis the average man.</p>

  <p>But since the women that tend to govern are statistical outliers anyway, the folly of equality of attributes is embraced. It’s not so. It’s not at all so.</p>

  <p>To the female casualties/outliers: Is societal pressure unfair? I know you whine about it incessantly, since the majority of my female friends are outliers, and they tend to have more male friends than female friends. And that’s because female discourse and female behavioral traits of cattiness, backstabbing, and gossip, aren’t at all palatable to them. So they prefer males who–on average–tend to be far more honorable and loyal and responsible.</p>

  <p>But the societal pressure isn’t unfair. Ask yourself the question: is it fair for these traditional norms to be reversed, in order for these outliers to escape criticism and pressure, while the rest of society burns? I’ll give you the answer: no. The part is subordinate to the whole. That’s the perfect standard of fairness. It’s perfectly fair for female outliers to experience hardship, even if it’s unfortunate. I acknowledge that. But it’s not the case that experiencing something personally unfortunate is identical to that being unfair, unjust, or immoral.</p>

  <p>Fin.</p>
</body>
</html>
