<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>Neoreaction is highly abstract and highly nuanced, and so is highly self-selecting, in terms of the sort of folks drawn towards it. I’ve also noticed that the vast number of neoreactionaries are post-libertarians–that is, they’ve all gone through their OMG MISES days, and for whatever reason, have been a little thrown off by the simplicity of that sort of principled system, where simplicity in this case is not a virtue. Simplicity is to be opted for only in the case that it has good explanatory and predictive power, in relation to its alternatives.</p>

  <p>Trying to explain neoreaction to the average libertarian is like climbing a progressively crumbling Jacob’s Ladder and trying to extend a hand down to the bottom to help the poor souls up. It’s hard to express mental states in language. Once you accept the paradigm, it’s easy to forget those at the bottom. What seems obvious and intuitive to you is utterly foreign to them. Not only can they not climb the rungs, <em>but they’ve never even conceived of those rungs in the first place</em>. This is why I commonly say: “Gee, I wish I could just hook up our two brains with a data transfer cord, because I just can’t adequately express it efficiently in verbal language.”</p>

  <p>Now, it’s obviously the case that the ladder can’t be a Meta Ladder for the ordinary folk on the ground, but for those capable of meta, the prospect of the climb is still daunting and not at all motivating. They’ve already made the transition to the top, they think. That’s what libertarianism is about, after all. They already made the crucial switches from liberalism or conservatism. This is the final stop on the train.</p>

  <p>In short, most libertarians are going to need some real good initial reasons, in order to encourage/shock them into investing meta resources, so that they can reconstruct the ladder, rung by rung, until they reach post-libertarian neoreaction. That’s mostly because the top of Jacob’s Ladder isn’t pretty by any stretch of the word. Not only that, but neoreaction is still a brand-spanking new ideology, but it’s the first modern political philosophy to seriously take genetics into account in a framework-wide sense. This is a remarkable innovation, insofar as political theory goes. In other words, you don’t have neoreaction without human biodiversity. You just don’t.</p>

  <p>So neoreaction, in order to draw more meta folks into the flock, needs to be broken down into ‘cheat sheets’–rhetorically efficient documents which explain ‘What is it, and why does it matter?” but I don’t know if it’s ready for that yet. There’s so much work left to be done, but I’m going to try and make an effort. Going meta for an extended period of time on each and every issue on a case-by-case basis isn’t effective, and it isn’t efficient. We need to communicate and defend the framework as a whole, so that it can be picked up and applied by the recipient.</p>

  <p>Nick Steves has done some <a href="http://nickbsteves.wordpress.com/reactionary-consensus/">great work here</a>, as have several others, but it’s not complete, and it isn’t intended to be. Bryce has written a short book called ‘What is Neoreaction?’ but it’s also highly meta, and it isn’t fully accessible to run-of-the-mill libertarians, which I want to market neoreaction to. Why libertarians?</p>

  <ol>
    <li>As I said previously, post-libertarians are the most likely to become neoreactionaries.</li>

    <li>Libertarianism and neoreaction share an obsession with microeconomics, albeit ours uses the same tools to come to different conclusions. But it also modifies those tools, slightly.</li>

    <li>Libertarians are already used to being ostracized by the mainstream, so it’ll be easier to find common cause on those grounds and to call them on any Cathedral-like responses.</li>

    <li>Libertarians already accept inequality on at least some grounds, such as income inequality, without the need for the state to jump in redistribute things.</li>

    <li>Libertarians understand the importance of polycentric legal orders, and the de jure/de facto distinction, at least in principle.</li>

    <li>Libertarians understand the importance of frameworks.</li>
  </ol>

  <p>I’m sure I could come up with more reasons, but I think that list helps to establish why they’re the most natural targets for neoreaction indoctrination, but indoctrination occurs through short and concrete ‘cheat’ sheets,’ or political tracts. I can’t just rehearse one of my meta posts on the application of the NR framework to some obscure issue. That just doesn’t convince anyone. What does work is when a concrete topic comes up, say open immigration, and succinct neoreactionary talking points are used to help those in the dialogue move from the concrete issue to the abstract principles of the NR framework.</p>

  <p>So where and when is it? Well shucks, I don’t have it. Not yet anyway, but I’m hoping at least to outline some of the sections here to then be fleshed out further in the future.</p>

  <ol>
    <li>The neoreactionary response to public choice theory and the comparative institutions approach</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to the non-aggression axiom and property rights-theory: why property rights are great, but why property rights can and should be limited beyond the initiation of aggression. This is perhaps the most essential point. Let ‘justice’ in the form of ‘muh property rights’ be done though the heavens fall. This must go.</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary defense of the state</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to microeconomic foundations: where the logic of basic principles needs to be tuned up a bit</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to a denial/sweeping under the table of market failure</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to a denial of paternalism</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to apriori, ‘fungibilist’ psychology, which has (1) a muddled up conception of free will, and which (2) fails to take seriously the role of genetics (this point might be better suited as a sub-point of #4, but #7 also covers the failure of libertarianism to incorporate an understanding of demographics into its framework)</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to autistic epistemology (See: <a href="http://amosandgromar.wordpress.com/2013/10/30/the-zip-code-problem/" title="The Zip Code Problem">The Zip Code Problem</a>)</li>

    <li>The neoreactionary response to free-trade, in addition to a take-down of the ‘I have faith in the free market’ view. Yes, this is an actual quote from a friend who works for the Kochs. #9 is best achieved, again, through an exposition of #4</li>
  </ol>

  <p>I get that there’s resistance to looking down Jacob’s Ladder. Anytime there’s a major framework transition, from X to Y, as a Y-ist, there’s a tendency to never really look at X charitably again, or to even tolerate discussion of it. <em>You’re so over it</em>, but in our case, it’s a bit premature for that. It’s amusing, isn’t it? You see this phenomenon, for instance, in converts to protestantism from Catholicism, and vice-versa, as well as ‘converts’ to neoreaction from libertarianism.</p>

  <p>We don’t really need to talk about democracy for this part. Not many libertarians disagree on our points there, but they need to be convinced that public choice theory is limited in its application to certain political structures, like democracy, for example.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction will be very much stunted in its growth if that’s the predominant attitude. Neoreaction needs to take libertarianism seriously–dead seriously–and to ‘stoop’ back down and help rebuild the rungs on Jacob’s Ladder. Each one of these sections (and I suspect more will be added later, and I encourage my readers to post submissions in the comments) will be defended through the use of bullet-point-arguments and stats. Not too heavy on the meta, short, sweet, hard-hitting, straight to the point, memorable, easily memorizable, and finally, a good dose of quant/empirical work.</p>

  <p>All of these help to answer the question: what’s the framework switch, why does it matter, what are the implications, and what does it all mean?</p>

  <p>It helps them get to the top of Jacob’s Ladder, and it helps you remember <em>how you got there</em>.</p>
</body>
</html>
