<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>(HT: <a href="http://educationrealist.wordpress.com/2013/11/21/unstructured-musings-on-choice/">EducationRealist</a>)</p>

  <p>ER’s got some interesting thoughts on ‘school choice’, charters, vouchers, ‘accountability’, teachers unions, pensions, etc. with the bottom line that what is going left unsaid and unargued (because taboo) is what’s really driving this train.</p>

  <p>Charles Murray has a little post, “<a href="http://www.aei-ideas.org/2013/05/a-case-study-in-the-government-as-enemy/">A case study in the government as the enemy</a>” which, in a way, gives the flip-side of the argument, but I think the particular charter school he’s talking about, and the motivations of those involved with it, present a kind of ideal and outlier case (and even then the County is ‘openly hostile’).</p>

  <p>But most of the time the facts and motivations are not that pretty. ER <a href="http://educationrealist.wordpress.com/2012/09/20/on-the-ctu-strike/#comment-837">points us to some comments</a> from a previous post which I believe should be reproduced in full:</p>

  <p>“ME”:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>The reason 48% of whites (who send their children to school elsewhere) supported the teachers was because they need the “bad” kids babysat most of the day. From early morning (free breakfast) to early evening (after school care) the “bad” kids are cajoled into wreaking havoc and violence only on each other, in one building, away from productive citizens – kind of like preschool for juvenile detention centers or daycare until they are eligible for actual prison.</p>

    <p>The strike meant the libraries, parks, etc. were unusable for any non-gang members because the CPS kids were flooding them. Sit and sip a coffee as a Chicago public school lets out one weekday – for example a much lauded charter school in Bucktwon [<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logan_Square,_Chicago#Bucktown">sic</a>] (a nice area so of course some fun and excitement had to be imported). Watch the entire surrounding area batten down the hatches before the kids are pardoned for the evening. It looks just like an old western where the Moms rush children inside, windows close, people pull their cars into the garage, wagons, strollers, and bikes get locked to porch rails…and then all hell breaks loose for about a half hour while the parents blast crude music and scream profanity at each other, clog the small residential streets with maniacal driving, and the kids stream out damaging parkway gardens, throwing junk food wrappers all over the place and “play” fighting. Anything not secured is stolen, anything that can be quickly and needlessly vandalized is just for giggles.</p>

    <p>That is why Rham [<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rahm_emmanuel">sic</a>] lost his power play. <strong>No one really thinks their tax dollars are spent on education – the bar has been lowered so low that taxpayers are THRILLED when someone just keeps the chaos controlled long enough to enjoy a tiny sliver of a decent life</strong> in Chicago. The raccoon eyed moron tasked with stealing everything Jr. left is either frighteningly out of touch with the city (almost definitely) or so dangerously stupid it is high comedy (also likely). <a href="http://www.chicagomag.com/images/2012/1112/C201211-Karen-Lewis.jpg">The crazy fat</a> <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karen_Lewis_%28labor_leader%29">far left of center lady</a> who kicked his ass without breaking a sweat is not dangerously out of touch or (as) stupid.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>ER:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Conservatives often talk about how schools are too lenient, that education should be a privilege that can be taken away. If bad kids were expelled, schools could focus on the kids who want to be there.</p>

    <p>I tell them great. Have they consulted the cops on this plan? <strong>Because the cops know better than anyone that much of school in certain areas is little more than babysitting potential delinquents.</strong> Are they prepared for the increased costs of jail?</p>

    <p>You’ve given me an idea for another post. Thanks!</p>

    <p>However, I had never really considered the logistics of what the chaos looked like until your post. That’s really sad.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>It <em>is</em> sad, isn’t it? Very, very sad. Both the facts themselves (the natural tragedy of the human condition via HBD, and the man-made social tragedy of encouraging a subculture of celebrated barbarism amongst one of those varieties) and the meta-fact that we can’t discuss the facts in public using our real names (the man-made tragedy of PC).</p>

  <p>There are certain kinds of realism that America is not allowed to admit and which can be incorporated into people’s attempts to achieve their legitimate goals only covertly, <em>sub silentio</em>, and through <a href="http://handleshaus.wordpress.com/2013/11/13/american-apartheid-part-0/">various kinds of costly geographic segregation</a>. Most people don’t really care <em>too</em> much about most of the actual content taught it school (though they should). They don’t need it to be some ultra-elite genius-camp. They just want a good place for their kids to grow up into young adults and reach their potential.</p>

  <p>When policy-types debate the efficacy (or, more commonly, <a href="http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brown-center-chalkboard/posts/2013/11/20-evidence-raises-doubts-about-obamas-preschool-for-all-whitehurst">lack thereof</a>) of various educational strategies and intervention, it is like debating which shade of red is most perfect for the skin of a rotten apple. No one wants to talk about the rot (actually, no one dares) and so we talk about proxies with just-barely-plausible alternative justifications, as cover for the real agenda.</p>

  <p>I’m sure there’s a great Russian word for this, probably a few. Maybe you want a little more private property, but since you can’t admit that, you come up with a socially acceptable way to advocate a ‘more perfect Marxism” reform that has the effect of getting you what you really want.</p>

  <p>And what is the agenda? Simple. Decent people want to be able to afford to raise their decent kids and send them to school where they’ll be encouraged to follow beneficial norms by their peers, and where they will be safe around these other decent kids and away from the bad apples. To ordinary decent people without ideological obsessions, this is the political and economic issue of our age, and no one is helping them. That’s what it seems like to me and all my other friends with kids, and of all political stripes.</p>

  <p>No one is quite sure what to do about the bad apples, except to keep them away and, somehow, <em>contained</em> <em>de facto</em>. If this can only be accomplished via impersonal economic forces in the real estate market, well, so be it, but it’s awfully unfair to the poor good apples who must bear the burden of the unmentionable passive policy.</p>

  <p>Except it’s getting harder and harder to not be a ‘poor good apple’, and so you’ll find yourself bearing a burden one way or another, either financially, or through bad-apple-proximity.</p>

  <p>My vision of neoreaction is in fact a very modest one; perhaps even minimalist. I would prefer to live in a society that effectively solves this major social problem, and I would be willing to give up a lot for it. I do, in fact, presently give up a lot for my attempt to achieve my own equivalent of it, and so does every ordinary decent person I know.</p>

  <p>But here’s the problem. It seems that giving us what we want simply cannot be done through ordinary reforms and mild adjustments in the present political system. In fact, any policy with half a chance of actually working and having a positive effect is defined, in the present political lexicon, as radical extremist racist fascism. Definitely ‘unconstitutional’ too.</p>

  <p>It says a lot about our times that I, and a few of my friends, and perhaps the growing numbers of readers that hand around these DE parts, feel that we have to flee brain-dead, reality-denying, pseudo-’conservatism’ (and all its relatives) as failed-bulwarks against progressivism, and find an altogether different political theory in a desperate search to find a way to achieve this most basic of bourgeois desires.</p>

  <p>What a strange feeling. The thing we want seems so reasonable and so obviously important. A decent life for decent people. And yet we are denied and thwarted and paralyzed and if we express these legitimate frustrations we are simply insulted and defamed to boot.</p>

  <p>We are not always told that the mere <em>wanting</em> is itself immoral (though I’m sure that’s on its way), but we <em>are</em> told that anything that can deliver our wants to us is <em>definitely immoral</em> and <em>simply</em> <em>not allowed anymore</em>. And that it will <em>never</em> be allowed. Because democracy and equality and social justice and ‘rights’.</p>

  <p>Everybody else has been given every other kind of right and it’s all seemed to crowd out the core experience of modern life – the fundamental hope and expectation of governance: Order for the Orderly. This, we are told, is called ‘progress’, but it sure doesn’t feel like it.</p>

  <p>Many of us were born and raised and taught, over and over, to believe that these are sacred words with special powers over us; the power to trump all our desires and objections and even neutralize logical arguments. If you are dissatisfied without remedy then you are expected to buck up and take it.</p>

  <p>But at some point, my dear novice reader, you will wake up and realize all these sacred words have been hijacked and commandeered in the service of your adversary. You will wake up and say, “If that’s what ‘social justice’ means, then to hell with it. To hell with all these made-up nonsensical ‘rights’. It’s nothing but lies.”</p>

  <p>“This is a fraud; the greatest sham on earth. But I’m done with this nonsense. F* that noise! If I can’t get what I need from you bastards, I’ll find it somewhere else.”</p>

  <p>And we will be waiting for you, and we will say, ‘Willkommen’.</p>
</body>
</html>
