<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>The First World War is a good deal more important to America’s history than most of us now realise. Given what it led to, it’s perhaps the most crucially destructive blow our national spirit has ever taken. Today we take for granted that the government at Washington is a global empire. But back when it wasn’t, when WWI was still an aberration from the <a href="http://theden.tv/?p=281"><em>normalcy</em></a> we tried so hard to return to in the 1920s, shock and disillusionment led many intellectuals to reveal their striking contempt for the majority of the American people. Unable to coöpt the common citizen, they stopped advocating reforms to uplift him and began cruelly mocking him. From <em>The LIFE History of the United States</em>, Volume 10 (1964):</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>The “pointless slaughter” of the war, and a feeling that Wilsonian ideals and the progressive spirit had failed, made the postwar decade a period of revolt, alienation and exile for American intellectuals. Impassioned reformers who had sought to correct economic and social abuses gave way to hostile critics who assailed the manners, mores and institutions of the American majority. With the publication of Sinclair Lewis’ <em>Main Street</em> in 1920 and <em>Babbitt</em> two years later, the empty materialism, corruption and dogmatism of small-town life in mid-America received a savage portrayal.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Sound familiar? Hatred of America’s ethnic and cultural majority is nothing unusual today—it’s what holds the Democratic Party together, after all. Those intellectuals, the <a href="http://theden.tv/?p=81">Brahmin</a> caste of yesteryear, are the forefathers of today’s assailants of “White privilege”. The LIFE volume continues:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>The “civilized” few launched a massive assault upon the philistines, “boobs” and boosters of the new prosperity. To this group politics was vulgar, religion a refuge for the unenlightened, business boorish, and culture nonexistent beyond the Eastern seaboard. <em>The Nation</em>, <em>The New Republic</em>, and H.L. Mencken’s <em>American Mercury</em> provided the intellectuals with platforms from which the “booboisie” could be berated in its money-lined wilderness. Many of the intelligentsia agreed with Mencken that if democracy possessed any merit, “it is the merit . . . of being continuously amusing, of offering the plain people a ribald and endless show.” Although the dissenters won few of their day-to-day skirmishes with society, the cumulative effect of their criticism produced lasting changes.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Those lasting changes, unfortunately, did not include the expulsion of said intellectuals from the country by a mass of angry <a href="http://theden.tv/?p=81">Vaisyas</a>—in part because their criticisms of democracy as ineffectual and vulgar were quite correct. But they did not contrast democracy with a nondemocratic republicanism, as the Founders did. Instead of taking on the noble role of an aristocracy dedicated to its people, they opted to attack and ridicule them.</p>

  <p>It took a <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/democrats-party-of-lies.html">sly takeover</a> of the Democratic Party and <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_II">another few million dead</a> to get “progress” back at the helm. Even then, the common American was too shrewd, too reactionary, to fall in line with what the progressive Brahmins wanted. So began the process of electing a new people—and now, nearly half a century after Ted Kennedy lied to us about the 1965 Immigration Act and what it would do, White Americans are looking at the possibility of becoming a minority within two generations. The Left have always hated America’s majority—so do the businessmen who pull the GOP’s strings, by the way—and now they’ve got a ragtag coalition of Third-World imports who hate them just as much. And though the native non-White minorities of the United States are divided between the two camps, progressives have brought most of them to their side—and if that side are to be believed, the dispossession of America’s core population is inevitable, a matter of numbers. It isn’t inevitable at all, of course—it’ll simply require more than sweet words and handshakes to avert it. The sooner Vaisyas realise this, the less of a mess midcentury will be.</p>
</body>
</html>
