<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>Over at Foseti’s, Handle <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/17/randoms-110/#comment-19638" target="_blank">makes the following observation</a></p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>You can’t make a “less-wrong” “everybody’s a disciplined Bayesian ultra-rationalist” society. You need a substitute or alternative religion-ish thing to put in there that gets you what you want to achieve socially. A set of irrational unfalsifiable beliefs. A structure of taboos. Constant Reinforcement through social pressures and all the opinion-making institutions. And, if you’re really confident you’re doing it right – a heresy mechanism that deters people from openly questioning the system and undermining all the hard work it took to decrease social-entropy and build social-capital. A set of Platonic-Straussian noble lies (and maybe your next generation of elites will even forget that they <em>are</em> lies) to keep the harmony going. A line of thinking that goes back thousands of years.</p>

    <p>Why is this the Darkest Enlightenment? Because it’s exactly what the DE Community (“The DEC”?) is complaining about with the Cathedral, and what the Cathedral was complaining about with the Church, and the Church was probably complaining about with something else, etc. Celsus lost to Origen, after all.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>If the Dark Enlightenment aspires to extra-digital heights, then Handle is correct to remind us that no social or political philosophy normalizes itself in a culture without a veneer of religiosity or a certain degree of myth. 1 in 1000 Americans has read the Constitution, but that doesn’t matter because most Americans believe in the Constitution.</p>

  <p>By anchoring itself to the brute facts of existence and rejecting utopian attempts to immentantize the eschaton, the Right has never felt comfortable with myth making because most myths fail to take into account the brute facts of existence and most religions admonish their adherents to bring heaven to earth at all costs. (The Right and Christianity became synonymous simply because, once upon a time, Christians believed in a Last Day of Judgment, not theirs to initiate, that would once and for all perfect man’s fallen nature—a feat only a supernatural power could accomplish.) However, as Handle rightly points out, the vast majority of Western citizens won’t ever steer their lives according to the brute facts of existence for the simple reason that most citizens do not pass their Friday nights with Steven Pinker, their Saturday nights with Moldbug, their Sunday mornings with crime statistics and evo-psych textbooks. As a pure description of mankind, the Dark Enlightenment will have minimal influence on human affairs, just as Darwin’s description of evolution has had only minimal influence on human affairs (<em>no</em> influence post-1945).</p>

  <p>The Left, on the other hand, feels absolutely at home with <i>the social construction of mythology</i>. The Leftist project is to reshape the world according to what the Left believes the world should be, which means rejecting the world as it is, the brute facts of existence—they are not ‘facts’ but adaptable constructions or contingencies—in order to bring heaven to earth at all costs. With such a project before them, no wonder Cathedral clerics are adept at co-opting discourse and shoe-horning their neopuritan vision into society’s words, values, myths, religion, art, discourses, thought-patterns. To them, all such words and values are open to jerry-rigging, and, indeed, demanding of change for the sake of social justice. <em>Reality? Psh. Sounds like white privilege and social construction to me.</em></p>

  <p>Appreciate, for a moment, the sheer audacity of the Leftist project. It must deconstruct the discourses, values, myths, and religion of traditional Western society while simultaneously constructing new discourses, values, myths, religions. The oft-cited hypocrisy of Cathedral clerics is an inevitable byproduct of a worldview that must <strong>at once deconstruct and reconstruct morality and myth</strong> (Spivak Gayatari has given this serpentine practice the name “strategic essentialism.”) Even as a former nominal Leftist, I don’t fully comprehend Left mythology, which sanctions abortion but penalizes freedom of assocation. However, I can at least appreciate the general project of Leftism: to erect a new moral/mythological order using pieces of the old but distoring those pieces beyond recognition, adding novel elements, and recombining it all in an orgy of fanatical vivisection. Vivisection! What other term can we use to describe a morality that tells us gender is socially constructed but sexuality is biologically determined?</p>

  <p>Composers of the new morality must be in love with the free play of signifiers. They must know how to persuade with words and emotions and words and emotions alone. No wonder, then, that the Left has always won the ‘hearts and minds’ game, has always controlled the means of rhetorical propagation, has convinced generation after generation to move ever Leftward despite clear signs of impending entropy and chaos: the Left has rhetoric and myth-making on its side in a world that responds to rhetoric and myth-making, while the Right points ineffectually at reality and Detroit.</p>

  <p>In terms supplied by <a href="http://books.google.com/books?id=_B1ZzvGewUIC&amp;printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false" target="_blank">Richard Weaver’s reading of the <i>Phaedrus</i></a>, the Right plays the part of dialectician seeking Truth while the Left plays the part of rhetorician constructing his own truth and persuading others to believe in it. The dialectician speaks a neutered language. He may possess dialectically-secured Truth but his dialectic lacks impulse, so he is destined to be ignored while the crowds flock to the sophists. “The pure dialectician,” Weaver writes, “cannot add impulse to truth . . . the soul is impulse, not simply cognition” (23).</p>

  <p>The key, Weaver argues, is to add rhetoric to dialectic. Whatever is secured dialectically is not, in and of itself, persuasive to most souls, so it is the job of the dialectician—the Right, in this comparison—to add persuasion to the Truths reached through his detached and analytical methods (or through his trust in the workings of tradition). In the <i>Phaedrus</i>, Plato explains it thusly:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>First, you must know the truth concerning everything you are speaking or writing about; you must learn how to define each thing in itself . . . Second, you must understand the nature of the soul, along the same lines; you must determine which kind of speech is appropriate to each kind of soul, prepare and arrange your speech accordingly, and offer a complex and elaborate speech to a complex soul and a simple speech to a simple one . . . (277c)</p>

    <p>. . . The dialectician chooses a proper soul and plants and sows within it discourse accompanied by knowledge—discourse capable of helping itself as well as the man who planted it, which is not barren but produces a seed from which more discourse grows in the character of others. (277a)</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>The difference between the rhetoric of the dialectician and the rhetoric of the sophist is that the former’s is based in real knowledge, not artful construction.</p>
  <hr />

  <p>Says Handle: it’s time to give up our quaint belief in rational humanity and join the rhetorical wrangle. It’s disateful but necessary. If we don’t do it, the Left will continue to do it at our expense.</p>

  <p>So what is the rhetoric of the Dark Enlightenment? What myths can we construct from our collection of harsh facts about man, intelligence, social cohesion and entropy, and the rest of it? What do our pretty lies sound like?</p>

  <p>I have no idea. But I can offer this consolation: <strong>they won’t be pretty lies</strong>. In its denial of nature and reality, the Cathedral mythology intersects with reality only at the best of times; the rest of the time, its myths are pure sophistry. However, given its commitment to accepting the harshest facts of existence, the Dark Enlightenment is in a less tyrannical position. Its lies will not be lies so much as sugary additives to make the bitter medicine go down easier.</p>

  <p>We will, in essence, be rhetoricians and myth-makers whose myths are secured to the results of dialectical inquiry. In the <i>Phaedrus</i>, Plato recognizes that truths need to be made palatable to those not willing or able to comprehend truth in its rawest form (“simple souls”). But he sees nothing problematic or immoral about adapting dialectical knowledge to the needs or abilities of different audiences. Indeed, if the truths of reality are to influence human affairs, they must not only be the truth—they must be persuasive.</p>

  <p>And Truth + Persuasion &gt; Persuasion Alone.</p>
  <hr />

  <p>And how could any discussion about neoreactionary myth-making be complete without <a href="http://radishmag.wordpress.com/" target="_blank">Radish Magazine</a>, the only outlet among us actually crafting some propaganda:</p>

  <p><a href="http://radishmag.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/2-5-equality-architecture.jpg" target="_blank">The opposite of quality is equality</a></p>

  <p><a href="http://radishmag.wordpress.com/2013/04/26/volume-2-issue-4-carlyle-rising/" target="_blank">Liberals/Conservatives . . . Reactionaries</a></p>
</body>
</html>
