<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>The benefit of civilization is that it “smooths out” the relentlessly capricious intervention of nature in man’s organization. Man trades some privileges he is otherwise allowed to keep in the state of nature in order to take on some other privileges which benefit him in the longer run. This is the basic insight of the social contract, which if you excise the tendentious political prescriptions it is supposed to bear, gets you at a relatively straightforward analysis of what civilization is, why it works, and how it could be improved. Civilization affords greater overall stability to its members; the division of labor increases prosperity which grounds the possibility for savings in order that one might invest in more civilization. In order for civilization to ascend to higher levels, one must invest greater and greater amounts of civilization into the project; this is dictated by the law of diminishing returns (a move from 1% to 2% of “net civilization” foments a greater increase in social outcomes than would a move from 5% to 6%). Like any business, if a society fails to invest the same amount of capital, social and material, into the project of keeping civilization going, stagnation comes as institutions and organizations fall into disrepair and go unrepaired. (This is your basic model for the ongoing collapse. Things fall apart and aren’t put back together again.)</p>

  <p>Greater power entails greater privilege, but it also bestows greater responsibility. If a generation of a family spend down the estate, leaving little material wealth to the family name, we would see that generation as the weak link who don’t deserve their name and have failed to live up to the legacy inherited from their forebears. Such is the same as happens for society; if we as a society do not seek to continue lowering our time preferences, and instead relish the exquisite banquets which selling off the estate can buy, this leaves little to no social capital for one’s descendants. It impoverishes one’s own children, quite practically enslaving them if they are left to bear not merely a lessened wealth but a vast debt.</p>

  <p>The concept of social stability is tricky to explain. The oh-so-clever autists will of course point out that society and stability are antithetical; society is always in flux, and flux is the very opposite of stability. To this we can only say it misses the forest for the trees. Stability is not the same as “perfect lack of change.” Social stability is a description of the change which does occur and whether that change threatens the vitality of the organism. Analogy to health of the body is most helpful here. Clearly, healthy biology is not merely not antithetical to ongoing change, but requires that change. The question is whether the change is of a type that lends itself to the integration of the organism or whether that change lends itself to disintegration of the organism. How we understand the health of a body is how we understand the health of a society. One must examine the whole body, not merely its parts, and one must examine its parts, not only the whole body.</p>

  <p>Let us distinguish between the aforementioned changing of parts as “mereological change” and the latter changing of the organism as “organizational change.” Mereological change involves merely the replacing of parts in the organism; the body is as healthy now as it was before so long as its dying cells are being replaced and re-integrated to the same roles previously served by its ancestors. Unlike the body, society as a kind of organism can also change, so that the analogy to the body would be if the body could go through a great degree of morphological augmentation. Strictly speaking, the body does not have hands, and could potentially be benefited were its hands replaced with enhanced prosthetics. Society can experience a greater degree of organizational change than the biological body can (for now, at least).</p>

  <p>Put in these terms we can derive some principles.</p>

  <p>The first of these is that stability is the first priority of civilization. If something is valued above stability, then this leaves the possibility open that the path of death is chosen; if we suppose progressivists are motivated by the fanatical desire to equalize everything, then if it came to a choice between the very survival of civilization at all and pursuing egalitarianism, that would be the end for humankind. Any value placed above that of stability and order makes a political philosophy accidentally nihilist. While there is nothing essential about the position which is nihilist, as it trades existence for its ideal, it is nihilist in practice. Any ideal greater than stability produces <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thanatos">thanaticism</a>.</p>

  <p>Stability doesn’t happen by accident. What with the realization by some that many norms are constructs, and that constructs can be destroyed, a fury of social vandalism is taking place witnessed only very rarely in society. Gender queerists (as opposed to gender normativism, i.e. my position on the matter) fail to realize, among other things, that it may be their own conflicted feelings about gender and sexuality which have to be sacrificed to society, rather than society being sacrificed to their conflicted feelings. Generally, we treat kleptomaniacs so that, even if it comes at a great psychological cost, they are not allowed to impose those costs on society. Group goods vs individual goods. Progressivists, who so frequently insist on sacrificing other people’s peace of mind, do so out of a miserable narcissism. There is nothing in the world that guarantees your peace of mind and the peace of society are compatible, so suck it up. Utility is fungible.</p>

  <p>The second of these is that stability can be better or worse served by particular kinds of mereological change. Mereological change, insofar as it influences organizational change (e.g. changing technology, changing demographics), does not necessarily decrease stability, though insofar as that organizational change combined with available social material is concerned, it may involve lots of instability on the mereological side. A strong superstructure is necessary for riding out high degrees of mereological change; in other words, social capital (like I was talking about above) funds your organizational changes. Deplete the superstructure and times of rapid mereological change become more likely to threaten stability. A superstructure which seeks not to stabilize, but to exploit destruction (e.g. the Cathedral) is suicidal, as it chooses a fast, bright burn of resources as ever more of society’s accrued social capital is spent to achieve its utopian visions.<a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/10/28/the-underclassing-of-american-blacks/">Each act of destruction justifies its next action, locking society in a feedback loop</a>.</p>

  <p>All superstructures form because there is some feedback loop. If the effects of the superstructure didn’t in some way lend themselves to <em>its own stability</em>, the superstructure just wouldn’t exist. The problem is not that change lends itself to more change, the question is what kind of change that is. If that change seems to be accelerating, you’re more likely to be accelerating because you’re pushing down a slippery slope. <a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/10/22/structural-entropy-and-measuring-decline/">Progress ought to be difficult, and if it’s easy, you might just be pushing with gravity</a>.</p>

  <p>But since the only superstructures which exist are those which create the conditions of their own stability, this puts credence to the threat that the superstructure will drive society off a cliff. Only a fool would deny that, from within the paradigm, the rebuttal of “More needs to be done!” follows from the paradigm’s own logic, and if that paradigm is what floors the accelerator right off the cliff, the paradigm’s participants will gladly run it right off the cliff, only wondering why the progress didn’t come shortly before being smashed to bits on the ground. Failure to treat that possibility as a live option speaks only of bluster, not wisdom. Surely if modernism is so great, it can be explained in detail why this doesn’t lead to destruction. You can’t just assume that, because society has managed to make it work in the past, society will continue to do so, especially if you keep changing more and more of the features which composed those previous societies. If you start replacing parts of your car willy-nilly, it shouldn’t be a surprise if it stops running.</p>
</body>
</html>
