<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>In China, they do work that’s crimethink here. Wired, in <a href="http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2013/07/genetics-of-iq/">an article</a> about intelligence researcher Zhao Bowen, makes this clear:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Some people are smarter than others. It seems like a straightforward truth, and one that should lend itself to scientific investigation. But those who try to study intelligence, at least in the West, find themselves lost in a political minefield. To be sure, not all intelligence research is controversial: If you study cognitive development in toddlers, or the mental decline associated with Alzheimer’s disease, “that’s treated as just normal science,” says Douglas Detterman, founding editor of <em>Intelligence</em>, a leading journal in the field. The trouble starts whenever the heritability of intelligence is discussed, or when intelligence is compared between genders, socioeconomic classes, or—most explosively—racial groupings.</p>

    <p>Since the 1990s, when a book called <em>The Bell Curve</em> (coauthored by a psychologist and a political scientist) waded into this last morass, attempts to quantify or even study intelligence have become deeply unfashionable. Dozens of popular books by nonexperts have filled the void, many claiming that IQ—which after more than a century remains the dominant metric for intelligence—predicts nothing important or that intelligence is simply too complex and subtle to be measured. …</p>

    <p>And given the fallout that sometimes results when academics talk about intelligence as a quantifiable concept—such as the case of Harvard president Lawrence Summers, who in 2006 resigned after suggesting that science is male-dominated due not to discrimination but to a shortage of high-IQ women—it’s no surprise that IQ research is not a popular subject these days at Western universities.</p>

    <p>But in his lab at BGI, 21-year-old Zhao has no such squeamishness. He waves it away as “irrational,” making a comparison with height: “Some people are tall and some are short,” he says.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Some people are tall and some are short; some people are smart and some are dumb. A Communist country that successfully rules a major center of international finance cannot be a stranger to pragmatism—a word that America has <a href="http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dewey-political/">ruined</a>.</p>

  <p>The Wired article starts off as follows: “Zhao Bowen is late for a Satanic heavy metal concert.” The symbolism is clear: an aversion to studying intelligence is part of the catechism of America’s current state religion, <a href="http://theden.tv/2013/07/29/screwed-since-1913/">progressivism</a>. There seems to be a sense among American true believers that something isn’t right about all this, that their creed might end up doing us all in: <a href="http://www.vice.com/read/chinas-taking-over-the-world-with-a-massive-genetic-engineering-program">Vice asks</a> whether China’s “creepy-ass” intelligence research program means “global domination” is in the cards, and <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/time-to-lead/why-china-is-a-genetic-powerhouse-with-a-problem/article6399668/?page=all">the Globe and Mail notes</a> Washington’s “outright fear” that a Chinese industry would be the world leader in a field progressive dogma has rendered taboo. Meanwhile, <a href="http://www.infowars.com/chinese-eugenics-factory-collects-genius-dna-to-breed-enhanced-people/">Infowars</a> shifts as usual into full paranoid mode, resonating far more with the American popular spirit than it ought to.</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Contrasting US attitudes to such eugenic interventions to Chinese ones, Miller asserts:</p>

    <p>“We have ideological biases that say, “Well, this could be troubling, we shouldn’t be meddling with nature, we shouldn’t be meddling with God.” I just attended a debate in New York a few weeks ago about whether or not we should outlaw genetic engineering in babies and the audience was pretty split. In China, 95 percent of an audience would say, “Obviously you should make babies genetically healthier, happier, and brighter!” There’s a big cultural difference.”</p>

    <p>These words are from the mouth of an academic, deemed by Chinese eugenicists to be a genius. If this man is a precursor to the envisioned “ubermensch”, then God help all of mankind. If you figure the breeding program to be unethical but safely far away, figure again. The Chinese genetic breeding programs have now been expanded to the United States. Just two days ago, <a href="http://www.pehub.com/191692/bgi-shenzhen-acquires-complete-genomics/">BGI Shenzhen announced</a> having completed the takeover of the US-based Genome research institute “Complete Genomics”. According to the press release, the takeover was “the first time a Chinese company has successfully acquired a US public company”.</p>

    <p>Chinese state-sponsored genetic engineers are now expanding their operations to the US. <a href="http://www.completegenomics.com/about-us/">On its own website</a>, Complete Genomics boasts that “Our human genome sequencing technology, which is based on our proprietary DNA nanoarrays and ligation-based read technology, is superior to existing commercially available whole human genome sequencing methods in terms of quality, cost and scale.”</p>

    <p>Wonderful, isn’t it? This superior technology is now in the hands of a professed eugenic institution from China, dead set on creating “enhanced” people.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>No reason is given for why these programs of study are bad; Infowars simply assumes that the word ‘eugenic’ does all the necessary work. But it doesn’t even come close. We shouldn’t worry that China is doing this, as <a href="http://edge.org/response-detail/23838">Geoffrey Miller suggests</a>; we should worry that America isn’t. We should worry that half of the people attending a debate in New York—surely a demographic closer to Wired than Infowars!—thought that babies should not be made healthier, happier, and brighter. We should worry that the spirit of pragmatism—the spirit of <em>winning,</em> of <em>doing what</em> <em>wins</em>—is gone, replaced with the slavish adherence to a creed that has empirically provided little but <a href="http://theden.tv/2013/07/31/multiculturalism-for-thee-but-not-for-me/">decay</a>; for <a href="http://bloodyshovel.wordpress.com/2012/06/21/the-fragility-of-logic/">history tells us</a> that those who prioritize keeping the faith of the state over winning lose. We should also worry that there are people who think it’s unethical to <em>make an entire generation of people healthier, happier, and brighter</em> because science is involved and science scares them and reminds them of Hitler.</p>

  <p>Losers don’t win. He who becomes a loser will lose. China knows this. They never had Whig history; nobody ever <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2008/05/ol5-shortest-way-to-world-peace.html">convinced them that</a> “God, whose ways are mysterious but whose arms are invincible, is on the side of the just—therefore it is futile to attempt to overcome a just cause”. There are merely winning causes and losing ones. If our morality would land us with al-Ghazali’s Arabs in the dustbin of history, then it’s time to get a better one; if there’s one lesson in common between post-disaster looters and the <a href="http://www.isegoria.net/2013/08/the-yanomamo-conundrum/">Yanomamö tribe</a>, it’s that there’s not much room for morality when civilization breaks.</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>Like most sizable enterprises in China, state-owned and private, BGI has a Communist Party committee. A banner in the sequencing lab reads: “Only with data can you find truth, and only with truth can you serve the country.”</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>It says something about the state of the States that the Communists beat us to getting those banners.</p>
</body>
</html>
