<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <blockquote>
    <p>Well, whom do you want to have reading your blog and commenting on it? People able and willing to discuss seriously the topics that you write about, or people for whom it’s an image-building exercise that strokes their maladjusted sense of self-importance? Wherever these two kinds co-exist for a while, the latter will always eventually drown out the former.</p>

    <p>-Vladimir, <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/26/randoms-112/#comment-20158">here</a></p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>Did I <a href="http://www.moreright.net/parable-of-the-unstoppable-mad-man-2/">promise</a> blasphemous drums and the heart of ultimate chaos? It seems I lied and any <a href="http://www.moreright.net/against-moral-progress/">moral progress</a> I make will have to wait. This is because my attention was consumed by a thread on one of our <a href="http://www.moreright.net/blogs-of-interest/">Blogs of Interest</a>, Foseti’s, where <a href="http://www.moreright.net/blogs-of-interest/">notables were grappling</a> with the consequences of the <a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/cambrian-explosion/">Cambrian Explosion</a> of the Dark Enlightenment. Specifically, <a href="http://radishmag.wordpress.com/2013/05/24/volume-2-issue-8-heroes-of-the-dark-enlightenment/">a trading card game</a>.</p>

  <p><a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/26/randoms-112/#comment-20137">Vladimir</a> <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/26/randoms-112/#comment-20156">considers</a> it an example of a worrying trend. He sees the community becoming powered more and more by local status spirals, a fandom of itself. This will make it generally too nerdy for serious thinkers with the inside knowledge or familiarity with musty old tomes that are needed for real intellectual progress. And thus, any interesting answers to the questions reaction has spawned will be buried under the rubble of low quality discourse driven by group coordination and status signalling. <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/26/randoms-112/#comment-20194">Foseti</a> and <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/26/randoms-112/#comment-20157">Spandrell,</a> among others, disagree.</p>

  <p>A new blogger at <a href="http://bannerofcosmos.wordpress.com/">Banner of The Cosmos</a> has written a usable <a href="http://bannerofcosmos.wordpress.com/2013/05/29/sophomores-and-sages/">compression</a> of the discussion. Some within reaction wish to focus on popularizing existing insights combined with object level politics. Others see this focus on popularization as as standing in the way of intellectual productivity.</p>

  <p>On More Right we had to face the same choice at launch: should we focus on popularization or eschew the limelight in favor of rigorous intellectual progress? It was not a difficult choice. We resolved to try to make intellectual progress even at the cost of inclusiveness. “If you build it, they will come.” And come they did, this blog has been rewarded with numerous interesting emails and articles from competent people willing to investigate and learn together. And our weekly Skype meetings alone have paid back all I have invested several fold.</p>

  <p>But I didn’t much think about the wider ecosystem. Is our small study group <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_rider_problem">free riding</a> off the popularity generated by others? To allay my concern that we are, I will try in my small way to give back to the wider blogosphere.</p>

  <p>Leaving online communities you don’t like has low costs. Unlike, say, leaving the United States, an online community won’t tax you for years after you renounce membership. They have easy Exit. It is also very easy to give your opinion on such communities and persuade others to change the direction of the community. Some are even formally regulated by voting of their members as say in the karma system found on reddit. This feature is called Voice. Nick Land and others have claimed that Exit is much preferable to Voice for making good states and organizations.</p>

  <p>Splitting will happen. People will disagree, and they will leave. This is fine. Unless your community has filled all its members’ <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number">Dunbar spots</a> with invested community members, you can’t try to manage a community as you would a tribe. And if you try make it a tribe, people will fall into tribal identities, and the most enthusiastic will be those who have least to contribute. “The best lack all conviction, while the worst/Are full of passionate intensity.” Needless to say, this is the opposite of how one goes about building a working group seeking to achieve real intellectual progress.</p>

  <p>For example, the reactionary blogger <a href="http://www.thumotic.com/2013/05/27/the-specialization-of-reaction/">Frost</a> wrote in favor of specialization. Hard to object, no? Specialization is how humans do anything noteworthy, and when we each pursue our comparative advantage we all win. I can hardly object to hierarchy and a need for humility; a norm of bending the knee to arbitrary Schelling points cuts down on politicking and improves productivity. But it is hard to avoid the conclusion that that post was primarily written to solidify in-group feeling rather than a <em>working</em> proposal for division of labor in service of achieving goals.</p>

  <p>As we see so often, <a href="http://lesswrong.com/lw/lv/every_cause_wants_to_be_a_cult/">every cause wants to be a cult</a>. Reaction is no different. If we hope to manage this community towards any other end, it will require purposeful modification of our intuitive tribe-building strategies. This is no small feat; it’s a hard problem identical to the problem of institution design. (Of course, we must solve institution design anyway, since all our programs for reforming modern civilization propose massive changes to its constituent institutions.) So instead of a Cult or a tribe, it is essential for us, while the institutions of reaction are still nascent, to build a well designed institution for figuring out how to design complicated institutions.</p>

  <p>We have our problem. Let us begin.</p>

  <p>Part of <strong>Towards An Institution Building Institution</strong></p>
</body>
</html>
