<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>I take the difference between neoreaction and conservatism to be this: the left is correct with their obsessions regarding power dynamics. Neoreaction, as opposed to conservatism, has the flexibility to appropriate that language. Conservatism can’t deal with ‘patriarchy’. It has to either ignore it or deny it as a concept. Why? They fail to distinguish between the formalistic principle and the substantive framework. Here’s how I see it:</p>

  <p>Progressivism: right concepts or principles, wrong background facts</p>

  <p>Conservatism: some right concepts or principles, but most of the time they’re just flat-out ignored and neglected, and some wrong background facts, although conservatives tend to be better than liberals in this area.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction: right concepts, right background facts.</p>

  <p>Conservatives tend to be cretins, however, as Moldbug notes. And that’s a significant problem, since a complete dearth of an intellectual framework leads them to adopt the most banal and blandly conservative positions, in order to beg for a seat at the table of mainstream discourse. Buckleyian conservatism. National Review. As progressivism slowly applies more and more pressure to conservatism, a reaction occurs. Neoreaction occurs. It had to occur as a response. As conservatism contracts, it sheds itself of the mediocre, and it regains energy. It’s somewhat like a fledgling religion. At its inception, the religion experiences something I call New Religious Energy. It begins fervently, it’s committed, it’s passionate, but as it slowly expands, that core softens and it becomes complacent, placid, stagnant, and overly universalistic, which in turn results in a slow and steady decline again. Expansion and contraction. Expansion and contraction. We’re on the ending phase of the contraction. This is neoreaction.</p>

  <p>For neoreaction, patriarchy exists. Power dynamics exist. Class systems exist. But what follows? Progressivism doesn’t just automatically follow, whatsoever. That requires something more than just admitting the existence of patriarchy, unless the concept itself is poisoned through a by definition move which renders it intrinsically immoral. For neoreaction, patriarchy exists. And it it’s good. It’s a necessary pre-requisite to civilization. It engenders stability and order and the flourishing of the household, which is essentially a factory for producing well-adjusted citizens, an operation that can’t be adequately handled by any other social institution, at least not as we’ve seen so far, and there’s no real reason to experiment. Patriarchy has positive externalities. Some women won’t like it, but the part is subordinate to the well-being of the whole.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction is about coming to terms with the full and wholesale rejection of every progressive formalistic principle + substantive framework <i>pairing</i>. Neoreaction is about rejecting the harm principle.</p>

  <p>“”But how does it hurt you?” First, it might not hurt me in a way which gives me redress under Mill’s principle, but that’s irrelevant. Mill was wrong. It isn’t about harm; it’s about the common good. Wicked men have need of masters because wicked men produce significant negative externalities, and it’s somewhat facile to see society crumbling around you, while you search vainly for individual instances of harm. Individual actions might not harm any particular person individually, but when they produce negative externalities on the aggregate, it behooves you to invent a moral device, in order to cope with that development. The part is subordinate to the whole, so it makes little sense to wring one’s hands and let justice be done though the heavens fall. If your idea of justice is that the heavens fall and fall often, then perhaps it’s time to revisit the theory itself. None of this, however, implies that consequences are all that matter.</p>

  <p>For neoreaction, justice means keeping the sky up in the air—where it belongs, and if property rights need to be abrogated to achieve this goal, then so be it. Neoreaction is pragmatic, then, but it’s a moral sort of pragmatism. It’s neither amoral, nor immoral. Neoreaction brings the chasm between the actual and the ideal very close together. What’s pragmatically achievable in public policy is never divorced from the normative. What’s normative is in part what works—otherwise there exists a prima facie obligation to avoid messy interference with natural processes, with spontaneous order.</p>

  <p>Most political philosophies posit a large gap between the actual and the ideal. Neoreaction narrows that gap significantly.</p>
</body>
</html>
