<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>It is very peculiar to me, completely unexpected to be frank, that I have come around to <a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/11/19/intellectual-property-gigantism-and-malthus/">adopting a view which is remarkably… Malthusian</a>. There are some who object to my proposition that medical innovation would not decline given a lack of subsidization, and I will get around to that shortly, but before I do so, I’d like to stake out more of the territory. What do I mean by Malthusian?</p>

  <p>To be Malthusian seems to me to be that there is a real threat of Malthusian stagnation in the case that technology does not accelerate apace with population. This we want to avoid, so we should choose models of society which allow enough room for innovation and development of new technologies. On the other hand, a society which starts expending more resources on increasing lifespans than would end up being allocated in a market free of state intervention meets another problem: the eugenic mechanisms which otherwise operate on a society with downward mobility are thwarted, and a generation ill-prepared to handle the responsibility of freedom from hand to mouth living will be ruined in an orgiastic hyperventilation of consumption, e.g. what happened in the 1950′s that brings us to today.</p>

  <p>But inevitably there will be a state, and the democratic state will inevitably allocate more resources to the innovation of life saving and extending technologies, since nothing buys more votes securely like promising to help a class of people live longer. So you get Social Security, Medicare, and numerous other implicit benefits with the upshot of making radical lifesaving technologies at the disposal of a populace that never would’ve sought them out were they left to allocate resources for themselves. That’s the rub. Society must be guided between the twin threats of under-technologization and over-technologization, as both constitute setbacks to the development of civilization.</p>

  <p>A technology afforded to a people who didn’t achieve that level for themselves will be placed under a greater evolutionary pressure to adapt than is usually faced by society. The relaxing of downward mobilizing pressures, even assuming an increase in median income due to technological development, precipitates an explosion of growth, and the proliferation of dysgenic traits, which will snap back into place once Death comes knocking to collect on all its late payments.</p>

  <p>I think the Pill may count as the first instance of widely adapted transhuman phenomenon. Social equilibrium in a society where the Pill is readily available is clearly quite distinct from a society in which the Pill is not, as the Pill acts as its own method of self-selection. Take a Pill in order to become an evolutionary dead end! Like a fly to fire, the allure and delusion of inconsequential sex is a temptation which none have yet been evolutionarily adapted to overcome. The desire to seek out sex outside the confines of marriage has always been there, but never before have the negative consequences seemed so mitigated. But then again, to the antinatalist, the Pill is not poison, but antidote. Sex was only ever a ruse to get people to have children, a pleasurable trick which saddles the autonomous individual with duties he did not agree to.</p>

  <p>But such a view is ultimately incoherent and short-sighted. Evolution did not select for humans to find happiness in material possessions. An abundance of material possessions may be correlated to procreative fitness, but this was only ever a means. In order to avoid the evolutionary logic of why we have any desire to accumulate material wealth, one must positively drown oneself in the consumption about narratives which justify a demographically destructive narcissism. All is consumed: news, personalities, philosophy, stories, these are all intended as feathers in a peacock’s tail, but this peacock isn’t trying to signal for reproductive purposes. It’s an absurdity, a symbol that has forgotten its meaning. Simulacra is the endpoint of a society that has become so interested in gazing upon itself in the mirror that it chokes to death on its own self-congratulation.</p>

  <p>Over-technologization exposes those in society most susceptible to the vice of pride to the yawning chasm of failed genetic lines. In principle, there is nothing wrong with such pruning, and it is better enjoyed as tragicomedy (if you’ve the stomach), but such a rapid pruning may leave a significant amount of capital tied up in the prideful burned and lost forever, leaving the heirs of such a society with poorer institutions and a poorer society.</p>

  <p>As such, if I may propose a new take on the question of guiding society, given the insights of Malthus and eugenics. A gentler means of approaching the future, making sure we get to it with our best foot forward, is to leverage the inevitability of Malthusian stagnation in favor of making a society which will accept technological innovation with more gratitude in the pursuit of civilization. By all means, do not limit births, but allow Darwin to work his vicious will on man. The death and selection seems to be performed anyway, either by abortion or contraception.</p>

  <p>Does this mean the purpose of some individuals is just to suffer and die? That the most they can offer to society is exhibiting their poor adaptation to the environment and being swiftly selected out? Yes. <a href="http://anarchopapist.wordpress.com/2013/10/25/the-good-of-groups-and-individuals/">The good of the individuals of a group does not necessarily imply the good of the group, and vice versa</a>. Group fitness must come at the cost of some of its individuals. If all traits were preserved, the genetic line stagnates, and those populations which are subject to antifragile arrangements, i.e. eugenic mechanisms, shall rule.</p>

  <p>The poor will always be with you. Alleviate their suffering and help them to come to peace with their existence, such is the purpose of religion after all. But don’t pretend poverty can be eliminated. To eliminate it would require eliminating human nature, which is only to say the elimination of mankind. Nihilism lurks behind every mistaken ideal!</p>

  <p>ur-Malthusianism is an embrace with the depth of human nature, which is ruled ultimately by the logic of sexual reproduction and death. To travel to the center of the earth, and come back again, the means of refeaturizing what appears as unalloyed evil to a people obsessed with itself. As Death walks amongst us, the question cannot be “How may death be eliminated?” but “How may death be used?”</p>

  <p>Those who would cheat death its comeuppance, who put faith in various “immortalities,” seem to me to fall for an allure similar to that of the Pill. What is living without an end but Hell? Precluding the prospect of finishing one’s life, in the individual sense, precludes living life to a purpose. Death is the boundary of life which gives it dimension; life without end is life without permanence, without definition, without animation. You were evolved to reproduce and die. Literally everything you are as a biological organism has the singular intent of passing on the genetic legacy. Everything you are able to think and to feel is meant to be able to adapt you to your environment in order that you pass on your genes. Your feelings cannot be adapted outside of this, the body will always know its being cheated. The body is not interested in its own life so much as passing on life. There is nothing in it which may be stimulated to get it to believe its good lies in something else; you may only suppress its realization of itself as evolutionary failure, but this is to kill the very self meant to enjoy the attaining of its reproductive end. The self and immortal life are incompatible, and that is why <em>I</em> do not, <em>literally cannot</em>, seek salvation in it.</p>
</body>
</html>
