<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>oh man, not only did I get an explosion of attention when <a href="http://foseti.wordpress.com/2013/05/05/4600/">Foseti linked me</a> (pretty much right when I was going into surgery), but also I got a <a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/cambrian-explosion/">shout-out from Nick Land today</a>. i know I promised I’d have a new post up yesterday, but that hasn’t happened. turns out the post surgery period is pretty rough, even for healthy 22 year old such as myself.</p>

  <p>anyway, let’s get to business here. neoreactionaries! there is less time left on the clock than you all imagine! the West, this once great civilization, is dead and rotting. look! look upon the <a href="https://raptros.wordpress.com/?attachment_id=271">sons</a> and <a href="https://raptros.wordpress.com/?attachment_id=270">daughters</a> of this age! look at her sidebar! you think those are just screenshots of isolated instances? there are thousands more on tumblr alone! communities of kids on kali-yuga overdrive!</p>

  <p>point is, the West: stick a fork in it, it’s done. there’s been a lot of talking, and many more people talking about it before, but we need to start thinking of our options for action. let’s say we’ve got 10 years before it’ll be too late to plan anything; this means the options worth talking about are: fighting, and exiting.</p>

  <p>fighting. fighting means pushing the clock forward through the cycle of collapse, to the start of a new civilization. what was nydwracu’s immediate response to my post about cities? <a href="https://raptros.wordpress.com/2013/05/04/city/#comment-58">“Fascism!”</a>. and that’s what we’d be talking about here. yes, fighting involves actual fighting.</p>

  <p>oh, yes, I know you aren’t comfortable with that. you’re thinking about exit already. but are you sure you’re ready for this? exit, at this point, means becoming a lifeboat – preserving humanity and civilization for after the fall. here’s a rough sketch. get a bunch of people together (preferably already sorted into family units) who can get along fairly well. one of them needs to be in charge. find a decent, farmable patch of land somewhere out of the way, and stock it up with supplies. dig in and stay quiet; be prepared to have to fight … and die.</p>

  <p>i guess we need some motivation on the subject of death here. fortunately, we’ve got Evola to help:</p>

  <blockquote>
    <p>The positive <em>contemplatio mortis</em>, to which I referred, no longer gives importance to staying alive or not, and leaves death behind one, so to speak. On the contrary: from this point one should enter into a higher, exalted, free form of living, carried by a sort of magical, lucid intoxication.</p>
  </blockquote>

  <p>(<em>Ride the Tiger</em>, ch 30 “Death: The Right Over Life”.) in fact, that entire chapter (and, for that matter, book) will be helpful as you consider these options. yes, failure and death is the most likely result of any path you choose! at least by choosing a path you will die on your own terms – there is certainly no escape through paralysis. you must orient your actions towards these paths, knowing where they lead.</p>

  <p>this leads me, by the way, to an explanation of my dissatisfaction with the trichotomy model. what I take issue with is the confusion of position and motivation permitted by the model. e.g. ethnonationalism can be a position (obviously the ethnonationalist one), but it can also be also be a motivation for a broader reactionary position (e.g. an opposition to modernity). even worse, this confusion of the two seems to come at the expense of an understanding of motivation, which I (for hopefully obvious reasons) consider the more important concept. now that I see what I’d missed, I can actually state my case – there are certainly more than 3 motivations for becoming a reactionary, and given that the West has already failed, position is becoming increasingly irrelevant.</p>

  <p>well, I’m starting to feel (physically) as adrift as whatever the point of this post is, so I’m going to have to end this here. hopefully the remaining anaesthetics in my system haven’t muddled my thoughts beyond comprehension.</p>
</body>
</html>
