<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>It is hard to look at or through neoreaction without getting the sense that Something Is Going On. At least, that seems to be the perspective alluded to in all media attention so far. Maybe we’re oversensitive, or maybe we just have a better sense for reading the implicit Cathedralism. Or maybe it’s just because we talk about ourselves so darn much.</p>

  <p>I think there may be something to this. That we talk about ourselves so much could be written off as sheer narcissism, and indeed it probably is in a few isolated cases. But that doesn’t explain why it is so pervasive. Is it a consequence of our Age, saturated in social media and the cult of self-promoted self-realization? Perhaps that is also a part of it. Yet I’m of the understanding that there is something entirely different about neoreaction as an ideology. It captures the mind in a way that no mere political philosophy ever does. The ordinary person negotiates himself between political views when he is so inclined, while for neoreaction it is hard to escape the sense of Lovecraftian doom. Once the mind starts working through the premises, nought but horror can dawn and one is pulled down like sink water down the drain.</p>

  <p><em>They say we’re better off under patriarchy.</em></p>

  <p><em>They might be right</em>.</p>

  <p>Hence the oblique, glancing attacks. When an approach is attempted that self-consciously tries to avoid the “racist” epithet, and even then, still indulges, since we are only <em>angry white males.</em> And remember to tell yourself that; <em>only</em>angry white males, not that such a demographic hasn’t done all the heavy lifting of history in the West, and could not continue to do so. Is that why, if we don’t want to admit it’s scary, we will say it is creepy? <a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/mission-creep/">But why is it so creepy?</a> What makes it so subversive?</p>

  <p>It is like Pandora’s box. You cannot explore neoreaction without being changed by the territory. You do not internalize neoreaction so much as neoreaction internalizes you. It is an ideology which by its very nature sears its witness into the soul of all passerby. There is something about the neoreaction which has not yet been articulated, but yet it drives the dialectic forward inexorably. One does not sit down and engage the Dark Enlightenment. There are enough allusions to make; the red pill, Moldbug’s invocation to get that acid out of the freezer. One is engaged by neoreaction. It does not display itself, asking you if you would like to allow the style to decorate and furnish some intellectual compartment. It gives you the tools and instructions with which you might perform brain surgery.</p>

  <p>One does not convert themselves. One is converted by neoreaction. Neoreaction wants to control, it wants to be free. It’s the zombie apocalypse.</p>

  <p>There is a certain degree of self-obfuscation that goes on as a part of it. We are resigned to being misunderstood and misrepresented by outsiders. We don’t take that to mean we should try harder to appeal; if anything, we need to be harder to find appealing. If we’re right about democracy, the worst thing that could happen to neoreaction is if it became common knowledge. Neoreaction is occultic. It speaks in signs and prophecies about Mysteries of the Inner Sanctum. One cannot look from the Inside Out, but we can look from the Outside In.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction, in order to even be articulated, began with a set of key insights. Cathedralism, the doctrine that Western society is ruled by an ideological superstructure known as the Cathedral, can only be explained through a memetic model such as Moldbug’s. You can only see the Cathedral with the perspective of an outsider (but to have such a perspective is to be an outsider). It is a model of the world that includes, in its parts for explaining how the world works, a theory of how other people’s models of the world influence their actions. It is a model which accounts for the practice of other models.</p>

  <p>Can an incorrect model have a model of another model that captures that model’s essence?</p>

  <p>Or, to put it more concretely (and less confusingly), can the Cathedral’s working model incorporate neoreaction?</p>

  <p>I think the answer might just be no. This is something different. The whole idea of neoreaction is that, in order for it to exist, it needs to bootstrap itself out of modernism by pursuing the modus tollens of every last modernist’s modus ponens. Every modernist assumptions appears in error, because the what if modernism is wrong? question proves so fruitful for analysis. If reaction is a virus which modernism has increasingly treated with memetic antibiotics (racist!), neoreaction is the inevitable result of overuse. Neoreaction is the vaunted super-bug. It is not only immune to antibiotic treatment, antibiotics is its probiotic. The neoreactionary doesn’t need to explain that he isn’t a racist. Your concern with signaling that you’re not racist just means you don’t get it. Yet.</p>

  <p>In order for modernism to understand neoreaction, it needs to understand that process of inverting each norm, and perceiving the justification to do so. In other words, for modernism to understand neoreaction, it must understand what is wrong with itself. By definition, such is impossible. One is either a modernist, and he does not understand neoreaction, or he understands both and is not a modernist. Neoreaction is modernism undone; neoreaction is modernism’s undoing.</p>

  <p>Until one is neoreactionary, one cannot argue against neoreaction.</p>

  <p>Of course individual points here and there can be picked off. But a full scale assault? The modernists have not even begun to understand where the ideological center of gravity lies. It is too far in itself to see outside any longer; it perceives only its own reality because it is, in a Matrix-like sense, reality. It cannot see outside itself because it has eyes only to see what it does. Its metrics are all orthogonal to our own. It is like trying to measure light with a microphone.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction is so precisely off-message it has accumulated every card of hearts, and so shoots the moon. There is almost a sense that the liberal, first coming in contact with pure, uncut neoreaction must make every alarm ring in a cacophony of incomprehensible sound. Fury to such disturbance is only natural, but once it is noticed that turning off an alarm doesn’t bring the world to an end, well… maybe some other false alarms have been installed? Boy who cries wolf and all.</p>

  <p>Neoreaction is fascinated with itself because, like first discovering drugs, one can’t help but experiment. If a little thoughtcrime proves less dissonant than orthodoxy, maybe a little more thoughtcrime wouldn’t hurt. The difference between an open minded progressive discovering neoreaction for the first time and a savage, sputtering neoreactionary is only ever a Sorites paradox. It must be entirely shut out and entirely incomprehensible, or horribly true. Mind you, never just true, but <em>horribly true</em>. It seems altogether too true, unbearably true, oppressively true.</p>

  <p>If it is to be stopped, that isn’t by calling to it from modernism, for it has already turned its back, but to get ahead of it. At far enough extremes, there may be no difference between behavior which is holier than thou and behavior which is more sinister than thou. In the name of a hyper-tolerant orthodoxy those who refuse to only tolerate an abnormal and extremely narrow range of preferences, who sometimes have less than sinister words for white males, shall neoreaction ascend with the past or descend with a Brave New World.</p>
</body>
</html>
