<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <p>I have been having internal debates with my old foe, Wittgenstein. Lest it is any secret, I have long been a great admirer of Wittgenstein, and would consider him <em>the</em> foremost philosophy of the 20th century, and without an understanding of Wittgenstein (especially what makes the early contrast from the later) one should fail to understand what makes the 20th century a unique century for philosophical development. Wittgenstein forwarded a predominantly anti-philosophical philosophy, which may make one suppose it is non-philosophical (indeed, Wittgenstein seems to have assumed he had achieved as much), but it is really the most trenchantly useful series of conceptual tools for developing a system of thought. As I am consciously concerned with the development of a system of thought, from time to time I am at blows with Wittgenstein over some aspect of how we are able to mean things by our language, for half the struggle in developing a system of thought is placing it into the context of how a mind actually thinks and knows. I am interested in <em>ideology</em>, which may be most literally interpreted as <em>the logic of ideas</em>. One who knows logic knows that logic gives not a single fig for whether an idea is true or even semantically sensible; input the logical relations, and the mechanistic process of identifying material implications can be undertaken without understanding of the original premises. This is what makes computers possible, and it is what makes artificial intelligence possible.</p>

  <p>There is a reason for my treatment of ideology as such. The meaning of an idea cannot be separated from its logic; the dialectic inheres to the act of communication. Furthermore, every act undertaken by an individual can be interpreted to mean something. Language is only a specific instance, a highly specialized tool for communication, but it is as a hammer to a rock. Hammers are not the only way of putting in nails, only the most (usually) effective.</p>

  <p>How can language be on a continuum with all other action, where density of information is concerned? It has to do with intent. All action undertaken by an individual is undertaken for some (consciously and/or subconsciously) recognized reason, and with regard to that reason we concern ourselves with trying to determine the intent of others. Behavior is read as a way of knowing a person’s mind, even if only a less clarified means than language.</p>

  <p>That we mean things to others is trivially obvious in certain cases, even if we are otherwise skeptical of understanding a behavior so ordinary as brushing one’s teeth. Clothing is an obvious example. Given even a relatively small income (in the West, at least), a wide range of means of clothing oneself open up, leaving only the question, to those able to interpret it, of which group they should like to signal affiliation with. Blacks understand this much better than whites, who often gawp at their willingness to put off “more significant” expenses in order to dress in the latest fashion, but the logic of the group should make it very clear. Individual survival is contiguous with survival in the group, as the group is itself the means by which the individual secures his own livelihood. Corporate America may be less beholden to these signals, as whites are simply less tribalistic, but that does not mean there isn’t a rational motivation for doing whatever it takes to acquire the hippest pair of Air Jordan’s.</p>

  <p>The individual, in other words, does not perfectly exist outside the group. Yes, the individual may be able to survive on his own within the wilderness, proving that we couldn’t define humans as essentially dependent on groups, but to focus on the individual is like ignoring the complexities of pack behavior in wolves. Not all wolf behavior is pack behavior, but all wolf behavior is evolved for pack behavior (or near enough to be indistinguishable). The individual’s own identity is not constituted in order to please some elementary desire possessed within, it is put together largely in part to facilitate ease of movement within and between groups.</p>

  <p>The danger of this reasoning comes in when one considers not material means of signaling, but “personal” and “private” elements of the individual which it is rude to interrogate. However, by ideology, there is nothing which separates a belief from clothing. The lesson of politics should be not that politics is the mind killer, but that politics brings out everything that is base within man. There is a very simple reason for this. Politics is only dominated by the realpolitik, and the realpolitik is as much defined by simple material constraints on how people may interact with each other as much as what they wish to get out of the interaction. Insofar as the material constraint is a force, and insofar as that material constraint does not change, the species will evolve in order to exploit that. Our innate biases and preferences have the purpose of survival and procreation, and whatever will get an individual to those goals is fair game for Darwin to make use of. Evolution is very crafty, nature is very shrewd. As much as we might mean it, everything, and that means everything, in the individual has been adapted to the environment in order that the responses to stimuli which most frequently end with survival and reproduction will be promoted. If that is “objectively” beneficial traits such as intelligence and strength, negative traits such as sluttiness and simple shortsightedness, or even a predisposition to liberal beliefs, these will be selected for.</p>

  <p>The logic of ideas is an instance of these material constraints. Though we are not used to thinking of ideas as having dependence on material constraints, especially if one is more idealist or dualist, it remains the case that the soul is dependent on the brain for the task of computation and understanding. (I am a hylomorphic dualist where this question is concerned, by the way.) It follows that there are better and worse means of managing ideas. Initially it may seem that there can only be one optimal ideology, but as with so many things, it depends upon the conditions in question. As much as I promote neoreaction as an ideology, I have my reservations at the edge of significance, i.e. where ideas have deeper meanings yet to be explored. A person of only so much intelligence will not be able to “grok” an ideology from the top-down, so any ideology which depends on that top-down grokking can influence, but cannot be adapted by, the ungrokked. Likewise, from above, a person who sees the limits of one’s ability to grok the logic of ideas also sees the limits of their ability to really make the ideas known to the other.</p>

  <p>That ideology is literally the “logic of ideas” should be a pointer as to why it must be defined as a “self-totalizing meta-narrative.” There is simply no thinking outside ideology: if you’re outside ideology, you’re outside any logic of ideas, and inasmuch as they depend on an intrinsic logic (spoiler: they do), then all ideas depend on an ideology. Clearly, that ideology does not need to be consciously developed and explicated by the individual in order to be referenced by their manner of acting, but it will always be the case that one will be able to identify the underlying ideology of an individual through sufficient observation subject to instances of experimentation.</p>

  <p>This is why I insist on neoreaction being an ideology. I know some remain convinced of its necessarily pejorative and negative character, but this seems an unwarranted moralizing contingent on a certain kind of signaling. “We’re not an ideology, they’re an ideology, that’s why they’re thoughtless buffoons!” But what if we’re all thoughtless buffoons? The idea may seem absurd or silly, but let’s take it seriously for a moment.</p>

  <p>I’ve always been aware, in this practice of “going meta” on arguments and modes of argumentation, that anything I say not only can but arguably should be put back on oneself. There isn’t anything wrong with psychologizing one’s antagonist, as long as one distinguishes between communication to the person and communication to the argument (when these are confused is when you commit an ad hominem <em>fallacy</em>), but one should also strive to psychologize oneself. Why am I arguing as such? What does this argument signal?</p>

  <p>This leads to the opinion that, whatever one is willing to say of another’s psychological character and how this is a constituent in their opinion, one must be willing to say it (and allow it to be said) of himself. It seems simply silly that, for all the articles and texts and comments on the internet which bring up studies that document certain biases in reasoning, everyone supposes themselves immune. (This supposition of self immunity seems itself a bias.) This seems the wrong way to go about it. If one’s ideology, or logic of ideas, forces one to be fundamentally at odds with one’s own evolutionarily predicated innate biases, then that ideology is flawed. It is at odds with human nature, and as such any mind inquiring sufficiently into its denotational character must note a lingering contradiction between thought and action. The point is that there should be no such contradiction, for thought is but a specific form of action. Ideological contradiction is, in other words, the purest form of doublethink. It is the inability to reconcile action with thought, or really, to reconcile one’s action with one’s action. It is to live without integrity, if we adopt a quasi-existential manner of speaking.</p>

  <p><em>But evolution doesn’t care about integrity</em>. It’s far too shrewd. It doesn’t care what its progenitors think, feel, or believe, so long as it makes one more successful at survival and reproduction. If the preference for sugar cubes, Marxian class analysis, or cream soda happened to make one more fit, then those traits and genes which benefit the development of the acquiring of those things will be selected for. Where civilization depends upon the maintenance of ideas, then evolution is working to make people apt to expressing those ideas.</p>

  <p>The only thing with ideas is that they are not static. Where we are otherwise subject to a kind of biased object permanence (think Platonism) with ideas, in reality an idea only exists as it is expressed. I’m not suggesting that distinct utterances of “1 + 1 = 2″ mean different things ultimately, the meaning of that expression is only contained in that particular expression. Apart from the material instantiation of its expression, the meaning does not exist. The meaning is not identical to its material constituents of expression (the meaning of this sentence is not in these pixels), but without that material, the meaning is not put forth, and does not actually exist. When we speak of ideas in the abstract sense, we are speaking of things in the sense that we speak of stones falling or gases dispersing in the abstract sense: laws which describe the actions of particular things, but they are not sentences which happen to describe any particular event.</p>

  <p>Given this kind of understanding, it is impossible to not subject what others say to an analysis that takes into account every part of where they are coming from and where they are going. What is meant to be signaled? Have they come around to this conclusion through reason, or through association? How would different ideologies interpret such a statement? How would they respond to particular kinds of objections? and so on. Such an analysis, when one enters upon it, inevitably leads to the self-analysis which at once stalls the process of reasoning and explodes it. Almost everything becomes a possibility, but nothing seems meaningful. An ideology cognizant of itself as such (for the power and persuasion of so many others lies in their signaling anti-ideological sentiment) is capable of any other ideology. It may be successful practically by default, for a system that consciously perceives its own operation and goals may manipulate itself to become a system which maximizes to that end, especially where the other ideologies insist on obscuring their own ideological pretensions. An idea that stands under the recognition of how it is formed with reference to a particular logic of ideas must be formed differently than an idea formed to another logic. It can be formed with the intent of denotation, connotation, exosemantic situation, and memetic propagation. The logic of ideas is everywhere human action is essential, for human action never escapes a logic of ideas. To be rational is to be ideated (to have ideas), to have ideas is to be subject to a potentially unelucidated logic of ideas, and this is only to have an ideology. There are no ideas without ideology. It is simply to deny that an idea isn’t defined or subject to a logic.</p>

  <p>What is the logic of ideas? That is still something under exploration, but it is at least why I propose that neoreaction is not a mere political philosophy. It incorporates far too much and is simply not reducible to the trends and philosophical methodology of modernism. If it’s a philosophy, it is at least a philosophy of political philosophy, but without being mere meta-philosophy. It takes different moral and epistemological values for granted, or at least is willing to take other values under consideration in order to navigate an analysis free of subconsciously valued propositions. (Note the relative inability of self-identified liberals to use economic concepts in their reasoning; it’s always a moral issue before it’s an economic issue.)</p>

  <p>If I am right that logic, even if it does not bestow meaning (let us not get confused on precisely what I am <em>meaning</em>), is at the highest of considerations for understanding a meaning, a sentence, a sentiment, and especially if I am right that ideology may be analyzed as the logic of ideas, then ideology is the highest and most general classification of understanding. It is even higher than religion/worldview (given my seminal critique, there is no real difference between the two). Metaphysics, epistemology, and the more basic study of logic all occur within ideology. I’m not sure this means ideas cannot persist in relevantly similar form between ideologies, but it is at least clear that support for some social norm, even if the same in end, does not occur coincidentally with support for that same social norm from another ideology.</p>

  <p>What is the place of signaling in this? My point to this end is that an ideology which is open to the proposition of exosemantics may utilize semantics in a way peculiar from other ideologies. An ideology which depends for its power on obscuring its own reality within the mind of its progenitors is limited in that it simply cannot go there. The subject is taboo, for the simple reason that the knowledge could only be incorporated following the complete dissolution of that ideology. In fact, I might propose a “living system of thought.” Outside the view of systems of thought as stable, statically existing objects, and much more attuned to an Aristotelian view to the reality of ideas (the meaning is instantiated in the expression), one conceives a philosophy that aims not at a set of “correct answers,” but a philosophy that aims at reaching “answers and meanings salient to one’s purpose.” What one takes as a standard of “truth” or “usefulness” or “meaning” is itself a part of the package, and once one has gone there, one cannot leave it out. The meaning of a sentence under the auspices of a philosophy of meaning cannot mean the same as a sentence without it. This is my goal: a living ideology. It is why I am reticent to give particular answers, but very keen on putting together arguments and ideas that challenge the mainstream and the individual. I want to know, not only what is out there, but why I think I know what I know (and the more I look into it, the more I can only use “knowledge” is a less than perfectly epistemological sense). An answer to everything should include why it’s the right answer.</p>

  <p>A signal within a community of knowledge discovery/production (I’m leaving it as an open question for now) cannot emerge (that’s another open question) without the signal being noticed by the group as a signal, fundamentally changing its character. What is a signal between the signally-aware is not the same as those who accept signals for informing their worldviews yet are unconscious of the work getting done by signals. It opens up a mode of critique to ideas, ideas which we are generally not familiar or comfortable with. “Am I believing this only to express affiliation with this group?” Indeed, it seems the experience of conversion, whether that be to a religion (as understood by modernists), a political view, or something else, can only be explained by this change in desire of expression. One begins signaling in favor of the other group, and that can include a signaling a strong rejection of the identified rival group (I offer for consideration my own antagonism to Protestantism; yes, I am inviting you to psychologize my anti-Protestantism). Under a modernist ideology one might loathe their own signaling (though frankly such a loathing seems very… white), but under a neoreactionary ideology, which seeks to take every inevitability to its own advantage, such signaling can be engineered to a high degree of hierarchy, e.g. one’s ability to signal by such a means indicates one possesses a sufficiently high IQ to at least recognize what counts as the means of signaling one’s own group affiliation (consider the Austrians and their manner of speaking). Neoreactionary signaling, in other words, requires that one grok neoreaction, to see what is “plain silly fun” and what is “super serious business.”</p>

  <p>This is where Wittgenstein comes up. Always, it seems in philosophy there is the desire to “get outside one’s own head” and take up a “God’s eye view” of the world. The problem is that there is no such thing. Whatever we can mean by “getting outside one’s own head” we must recognize such a task is absurd, and if there is a “God’s eye view” it must be incommunicable to humans, and that’s assuming we even mean anything by such sentences. The ability to mean things, to have communications express intent between the gulfs of private personhood, is the ultimate question of ideology, and whoever solves that, can control minds as much as they could ever be controlled.</p>
</body>
</html>
