<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title></title>
  <link href="../Styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
  <header>
    <h1>Glossary</h1>
  </header>

  <p>Sources:</p>

  <ul>
    <li><strong>MR</strong> - <a href="http://www.moreright.net/neoreactionary-glossary/">http://www.moreright.net/neoreactionary-glossary/</a></li>

    <li><strong>NY</strong> - <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/glossary/">http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/glossary/</a></li>
  </ul>

  <p><strong>Anarcho-fascism</strong> — More polite than the finger, but communicating the same meaning. <a href="http://nydwracu.tumblr.com/post/36487196293/since-i-have-to-explain-this">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Anarcho-tyranny</strong> — A system of misrule in which a government refuses to control real criminals but controls the innocent: legitimate functions of government are neglected, but illegitimate functions are performed. “The result of anarcho-tyranny is that government swells in power, criminals are not controlled, and law-abiding citizens wind up being repressed by the state and attacked by thugs.” <a href="http://www.vdare.com/articles/anarcho-tyranny-where-multiculturalism-leads">[1]</a> <a href="http://www.vdare.com/articles/mass-immigration-feckless-feds-anarcho-tyranny">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Aretae’s first law</strong> — The feedback system defines the system itself. Or: Rates, not states. <a href="http://aretae.blogspot.com/2010/03/aretaes-1st-law.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://aretae.blogspot.com/p/fundamentals.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Aristocracy</strong> – <a href="http://traditionalistnotes.tumblr.com/post/53004765437/aristocracy-is-an-indeterminate-concept">Evola</a>: <em>“Aristocracy” is an indeterminate concept. Literally speaking, “the best ones” is a relative term. ”Best” in terms of what, in view of what?”</em> But <a href="http://traditionalistnotes.tumblr.com/post/52864102338/superiority-and-power-need-to-go-hand-in-hand-as">also</a>,<em>“certain men have been followed, obeyed, and venerated for displaying a high degree of endurance, responsibility, lucidity, and a dangerous, open, and heroic life that others could not; it was decisive here to be able to recognize a special right and a special dignity in a free way. To depend on such leaders constituted not the subjugation, but rather the elevation of the person; this, however, makes no sense to the defenders of the “immortal principles” and to the supporters of “human dignity” because of their obtuseness.”</em> <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Aristocratic Republic</strong> — The original intent of the Founding Fathers of the United States was a Republic with a <em>de facto</em> “natural aristocracy,” which has since morphed into a Demotist system. The Roman Republic is an example of a successful aristocratic republic which eventually transformed into a monarchy. Some Reactionaries advocate the return of the United States to this form of government. Thomas Jefferson <a href="http://www.greatbooks.org/?id=301">called</a> natural aristocracy “the most precious gift of nature”. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>BDH-OV conflict</strong> — The conflict, created by the democratic convention of limited war, of the <em>Brahmin</em>, <em>Dalit</em>, and <em>Helot</em> castes against the Optimate and Vaisya castes. The modern-day manifestation of <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Black magic</strong> — The redivision of the semantic <em>territory</em>, forming new <em>maps</em>. Contrasts with <em>white magic.</em> <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/05/voice-exit-and-the-catholic-question/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Brahmin</strong> — One of Mencius Moldbug’s five <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">castes</a>. Defines status by “scholarly achievement, success in an intellectual profession, or position of civic responsibility.” America’s intellectual caste. High-status Brahmin occupations include artist, scientist, lawyer, and activist. America’s governing class. Allied with the <em>Dalits</em> and<em>Helots</em> against the <em>Optimates</em> and <em>Vaisyas</em>. “The ideal Brahmin would live in a cabin, chop his own wood, own nothing else in the world, be the world’s top-ranking poet, and condescend to teach a seminar at Harvard every five years or so.” <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Carlyle’s law</strong> — Only humans govern. Or: personnel is policy. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/07/14/an-open-letter-to-trayvon-martin-supporters/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Caste</strong> — A social group defined by its status system. America has five castes: <em>Brahmin</em>, <em>Dalit</em>, <em>Helot</em>, <em>Optimate</em>, and <em>Vaisya</em>; a sixth caste, <em>Antyaja</em>, is sometimes included in the analysis. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p>The <strong>Cathedral</strong> — The self-organizing consensus of Progressives and Progressive ideology represented by the universities, the media, and the civil service. A term <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2009/01/gentle-introduction-to-unqualified.html">coined</a>by blogger Mencius Moldbug. The Cathedral has no central administrator, but represents a consensus acting as a coherent group that condemns other ideologies as evil. Community writers have enumerated the <a href="http://theden.tv/2013/09/19/anil-dash-wannabe-executioner-for-the-new-inquisition/">platform of Progressivism</a> as women’s suffrage, prohibition, abolition, federal income tax, democratic election of senators, labor laws, desegregation, popularization of drugs, destruction of traditional sexual norms, ethnic studies courses in colleges, decolonization, and gay marriage. A defining feature of Progressivism is that <em>“you believe that morality has been essentially solved, and all that’s left is to work out the details.”</em> Reactionaries see Republicans as Progressives, just lagging 10-20 years behind Democrats in their adoption of Progressive norms. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Complementarity</strong> — The view that <em>“men and women complement one another as separate parts that together make up a composite whole.”</em> Also called<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complementarianism">complementarism</a>. Related to the empirical view that men and women have different psychologies and are thus suited to different, complementary roles in society. Both men and women are seen as responsible for contributing “civilizing influence” to society as a whole, beginning with the atomic unit of society, the family. Among Reactionaries, most strains of feminism are seen as exacerbating male-female conflict and mortgaging long-term social vigor for the fleeting rewards of frivolity, hypergamy, and juvenilism. By the same token, misogyny, adultery, domestic abuse, fatherly irresponsibility, and the incessant whining of “men’s rights activists” are frowned upon as encouraging the same conflicts. Reactionaries acknowledge that securing the future depends on raising children in a stable and nurturing environment with a father and mother, and that the selfish desires of parents are secondary to this central goal. Without children, a culture simply self-terminates. Idolizing childlessness is a form of cultural suicide. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Conquest’s first law</strong> — Everyone is conservative about what he knows best. <a href="http://www.isegoria.net/2008/07/robert-conquests-three-laws-of-politics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Conquest’s second law</strong> — Any organization not explicitly right-wing sooner or later becomes left-wing. <a href="http://www.isegoria.net/2008/07/robert-conquests-three-laws-of-politics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Conquest’s third law</strong> — The simplest way to explain the behavior of any bureaucratic organization is to assume that it is controlled by a cabal of its enemies. <a href="http://www.isegoria.net/2008/07/robert-conquests-three-laws-of-politics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Crocodile</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Crocodile</strong> <strong>humor</strong> — The trope in which the smug and powerful mock the peasants and barbarians. After the Soviet humor magazine Krokodil, which “loved to parody the buffoonish, corrupt doings of the hooligan dissidents.” <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/12/matthew-yglesias-anatomy-of.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Czarnoksieznik</strong> — A practitioner of <em>black magic.</em> From Polish “evil wizard”. Cf. <em>czarodziej.</em> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Czarodziej</strong> — A practitioner of <em>white magic.</em> From Polish “good wizard”. Cf. <em>czarnoksieznik.</em> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Dalit</strong> — One of Mencius Moldbug’s five <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">castes</a>. Defines status by wealth, power, and sexual success for men, and by attractiveness and popularity for women. Favored occupation: crime, perceived as guerrilla warfare against an unjust society; but some exceptionally high-status Dalits are in music and athletics. Consists of multiple ethnic subgroups with little to no solidarity. Historically rare. Allied with the Brahmins and Helots against the Vaisyas and Optimates. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Dark Enlightenment</strong> — A new intellectual current made up of Reactionary components. The unifying factor of the Dark Enlightenment is a critique of Democracy, bluntly summarized by Peter Thiel when <a href="http://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian">he wrote</a>, <em>“I no longer believe that freedom and democracy are compatible.”</em> The “Dark Enlightenment” is a term coined by British philosopher Nick Land, who explicated the concept in his <a href="http://bam-pow-oof.tumblr.com/post/37857338807/the-dark-enlightenment-the-complete-series-by-nick">Dark Enlightenment sequence</a>. This sequence, along with the <a href="http://moldbuggery.blogspot.com/">writings of Mencius Moldbug</a>, make up the core literature of the movement. The Dark Enlightenment is a Reactionary project that rejects modernity, universalism, and Democracy in favor of Traditionalist, particularist, and aristocratic values. The term is sometimes used interchangeably with “neoreaction” or “neoreactionary”. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Demotism</strong> — Rule in the name of the People. The term has been <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/07/democracy-as-adaptive-fiction.html">recently popularized</a>by Mencius Moldbug. Democracy and Communism are seen as two types of Demotism. Reactionaries view Demotism as a form of mob rule, where politicians pander to what they see as the popular will, rather than making their own decisions as independent leaders. A quote of unknown attribution, which first appears in print in 1951, sums up the Reactionary view on Demotism: <em>“A democracy cannot exist as a permanent form of government. It can only exist until the majority discovers it can vote itself largess out of the public treasury. After that, the majority always votes for the candidate promising the most benefits with the result the democracy collapses because of the loose fiscal policy ensuing, always to be followed by a dictatorship, then a monarchy.”</em> Reactionaries see the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reign_of_Terror">Reign of Terror</a> and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Purge">Stalin’s Purges</a> as classic consequences of Demotism. Though monarchies have historically persecuted religious and ethnic minorities within their borders, none have shed blood on the scale of the French or Russian Revolutions and their subsequent purges. Quoting Erik von Keuhnelt-Leddihn: <em>“The renaissance of democracy marked the beginning of the Age of the “G”—guillotines, genocide, gaols, gallows, gaschambers and Gulags.”</em> <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Die Lösung</strong> — <em>The Solution.</em> The strategy of a party in a democracy to manipulate the makeup of the voting population in its favor. “Would it not be easier in that situation for the government to dissolve the people and elect another?” <a href="http://mrzine.monthlyreview.org/2006/brecht140806.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Duocode</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Duocodicalism</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Elthede</strong> — An outgroup. More precisely, if thede(x) gives a list of all thedes that x identifies with, an elthede is any thede not on that list. Usually refers to the subset that x’s thedes define themselves in opposition to. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Elthedish</strong> — Signaling identification with an elthede. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Exosemantic</strong> — “The part of a word or statement that isn’t its strict entailments, but which are extremely common implicatures– specifically, these shouldn’t be contextual or Gricean implicatures, but socially bound ones, which have been formed by continued use of the word in particular contexts, or by particular speakers.”<a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Formalism</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Fourth-circuit argumentation</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Furthest remove</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Goodhart’s law</strong> — When a metric becomes a target, it ceases to be a good metric. Or: Once a social or economic measure is turned into a target for policy, it will lose any information content that had qualified it to play such a role in the first place. <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart's_law">[1]</a> <a href="http://lesswrong.com/lw/1ws/the_importance_of_goodharts_law/">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Group dynamics</strong> — The study of man as a social animal, or rules that that study turns up. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Helot</strong> — One of Mencius Moldbug’s five <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">castes</a>. An imported peasant caste that defines status by hard work, money, and power for men, and by attractiveness, motherhood, and association with successful men for women. Their value system is unsustainable in the US; their children usually become Dalits, but new Helots can always be imported. Historically rare. Allied with the Brahmins and Dalits against the Optimates and Vaisyas. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Idealism</strong> — The belief that universals—for example, <em>peace</em>, <em>freedom</em>, <em>justice,</em> or <em>Aryanism</em>—exist independently.<a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/idealism-is-not-great.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Incentive structure</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Julius Evola</strong> — Italian political philosopher and esotericist who wrote from 1920 until his death in 1969. Evola has been described as <em>“aristocratic, masculine, traditionalist, heroic and defiantly reactionary.”</em> An Italian scholar wrote, <em>“Evola’s thought can be considered one of the most radically and consistently antiegalitarian, antiliberal, antidemocratic, and antipopular systems in the twentieth century.”</em> Evola’s political work revolves around the concept of the <a href="http://www.moreright.net/introducing-the-organic-state/">“Organic State,”</a> a hierarchical and natural society that encourages a measure of human freedom, autonomy, and flourishing while integrating individual men and women into a larger coherent system that elevates them, gives their lives meaning, and makes them part of a purposeful whole. Like other Traditional systems, the Organic State is antidemocratic, delegating political decisions to an aristocratic elite. Evola emphasized higher “spiritual” (merely a term to refer to higher values, not to the supernatural) values like civic belonging and heroic accomplishment over exclusively material achievements. A good place to start reading Evola’s work is his book <em><a href="http://www.juliusevola.com/julius_evola/texts/MenAmongtheRuins.pdf">Men Among the Ruins</a></em>. A compilation of short quotes from Evola may be found at the <a href="http://traditionalistnotes.tumblr.com/page/7">Traditionalist Notes</a> blog. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Land’s law</strong> — Whatever is subsidized is promoted. <a href="http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/#part3">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">MR</span> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Law of Sewage</strong> — If you put a drop of wine in a barrel of sewage, you get sewage. If you put a drop of sewage in a barrel of wine, you get sewage. Mencius Moldbug says: “You’ll find that this rule applies perfectly to many fields of human endeavor.” <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2009/09/gentle-introduction-to-unqualified.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://anomalyuk.blogspot.com/2009/09/enhanced-model-of-zombie-infestation.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Leftism</strong> — The Reactionary Right sees Leftism as an ideology that seeks to tear down exceptionalism and Traditional structures so that the lowest common denominator can satiate their feelings of envy and pathological altruism. A capitalist, leftist society primarily legitimizes accomplishment in only a couple domains — money and hedonism — at the expense of all higher values, including long-term societal stability. Instead of encouraging individual accomplishment, Leftism is driven by a “leveling dynamic” summarized by the pithy slogan “everyone gets a trophy”. Social “progress” is defined in terms of maximizing short-term individual hedonism at the expense of general societal health. Promoting an “anything goes” mentality, the end result is a cloud of largely indistinguishable, atomized individuals, rather than anything resembling social coherence or strength. “Culture” is seen as a fluid construct, to be thrown out casually and replaced with a new alternative at the slightest whim. Moral and cultural relativism reigns. No system can be seen as better than any other, lest the proponents of the inferior system take offense. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Map</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Meme</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Memeplex</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Mencius Moldbug</strong> — An influential blogger who breathed new life into the intellectual Far Right with his distinctive long-winded and mercurial <a href="http://moldbuggery.blogspot.com/">monologues on politics and history</a>, primarily written from 2007-2010. Moldbug is seen as the intellectual founder of the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactionary#21st_century">“neoreactionary” movement</a>, a term <a href="http://mangans.blogspot.com/2013/09/who-coined-term-neoreactionary.html">coined by a blog commenter</a> in 2009 and<a href="http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2010/07/the_neo-reactio.html">popularized</a> by economist Arnold Kling in 2010. Moldbug’s most important sequences are his <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2008/04/open-letter-to-open-minded-progressives.html">“Open Letter to Open-Minded Progressives,”</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2009/01/gentle-introduction-to-unqualified.html">“A Gentle Introduction to Unqualified Reservations,”</a> and <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/04/formalist-manifesto-originally-posted.html">“A Formalist Manifesto,”</a> about a couple hundred pages in all. The near-complete Moldbug corpus is 4,470 pages long and is <a href="http://t.co/tZ6winIy4I">available as an ebook</a>. Very few of Moldbug’s fans have read anywhere near his entire corpus; reading a couple hundred pages will give you the idea. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Moldbug’s law of sovereignty</strong> — Sovereignty is conserved. <a href="http://awarroom.wordpress.com/2013/06/30/a-republic-of-farce-2/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Monarchy</strong> — The favored form of government among reactionaries. For academic discussions of why monarchy is a good idea, see <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Democracy-The-God-That-Failed-Economics/dp/0765808684"><em>Democracy: The God That Failed</em></a> by Hans Hermann-Hoppe and <a href="http://mises.org/books/liberty.pdf"><em>Liberty or Equality</em></a> by Erik von Keuhnelt-Leddihn. Monarchies are relatively libertarian by current standards, in the sense that the government generally consumes 2-5% of GDP, unlike modern social democracies which consume 40-80% of GDP. Legally speaking, monarchies tend to have fewer laws, but enforce them more strictly, following Tacitus’ dictum: <em>“The more corrupt the state, the more numerous the laws.”</em> In general, monarchies put more power into the hands of local government. A key argument in favor of monarchy is that leaders tend to have a lower <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_preference">time preference</a>, meaning they have a greater personal stake in the long-term well being of the country, compared to career politicians oriented towards four-year election cycles. There is a debate in the reactionary community about succession rules, whether adoptive succession or hereditary succession is preferred. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Monocodicalism</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Neocameralism</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Neoreaction</strong> — The novel reactionary movement that developed starting in 2007 around the writings of Mencius Moldbug, with the term itself <a href="http://mangans.blogspot.com/2013/09/who-coined-term-neoreactionary.html">coined by a blog commenter</a>in 2009. Neoreaction has a more analytical, abstract approach to Traditionalist Right thinking than historical Reaction. Neoreaction can be seen as a part of the Reaction in general, with which it has a <a href="http://thereflectivereactionary.wordpress.com/2013/06/28/reactionary-problems/">complicated relationship</a>. Ultimately, the goal of neoreaction is to provide a concrete body of political and administrative policy which can be used to form a new government. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Nostrism</strong> — The use of the word “we” to refer to a social structure or group, especially government. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/utley-rule-and-bdh-alliance.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p>The <strong>Old Law of Gnon</strong> — The penalty for stupidity is death. Any eugenic trend within history is expressed by continuous downward mobility. <a href="http://www.xenosystems.net/the-monkey-trap/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Optimate</strong> — One of Mencius Moldbug’s five <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">castes</a>. Defines status by birth, breeding, and personal character, with wealth serving as a prerequisite but not a mark of actual distinction. Additional status can be conferred by participation in the military, where they usually become officers. Sees themselves as superior to the Brahmins, and vice versa. Allied with the Vaisyas against the Brahmins, Dalits, and Helots. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[2]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Radical Traditionalism</strong> – The philosophical perspective and societal vision developed by Julius Evola. The term is also used for a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traditionalist_Catholic">movement of Catholic conservatives</a>. Among Catholics, the primary Radical Traditionalist organization is the <a href="http://sspx.org/">Society for St. Pius X</a> (SSPX). Since the term carries a double meaning, clarification may be needed. At <em>More Right</em>, the term is used to refer to Evola’s ideas unless otherwise noted. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Rangordnung</strong> — The society-wide ranking of castes. Can be nonlinear, and in America is. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/roth-castes-chimps-and-rangordnung.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Ratus quo</strong> — Awful pun on “status quo”, referring not to the state of things at the current moment, but the direction things are currently moving in. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2012/12/18/adam-lanza-digested-by-rats/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Reaction</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Reactionary</strong> — It is important to recognize that the term “reactionary” was coined as an epithet, referring to French monarchists. When modern-day reactionaries use the term, they are not necessarily advocating literally returning to a <em>status quo ante</em>, but moving society in the direction of forms based on order, higher aesthetics, hierarchy, stability, peacefulness, aristocracy, tradition, cultural coherence, family, and the like. The steps in this direction have to be tailored to a specific time and place, based on perennial principles in harmony with human nature rather than literally turning back the clock. Rather than a chaotic <a href="http://www.moreright.net/oaks-vs-sandboxes/">“sandbox”</a> of clashing cultures warring through democratic proxies, reactionaries aspire to an “oak” society that fosters strong interpersonal trust, monoculture, and a unified vision. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Reactionary authors</strong> — Notable reactionary authors and figures contributing materially to contemporary reactionary thought include <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmund_Burke">Edmund Burke</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicol%C3%A1s_G%C3%B3mez_D%C3%A1vila">Nicolás Gómez Dávila</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_de_Maistre">Joseph de Maistre</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julius_Evola">Julius Evola</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klemens_von_Metternich">Klemens von Metternich</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oswald_Spengler">Oswald Spengler</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Faulkner">William Faulkner</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mishima_Yukio">Yukio Mishima</a>, <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/">Mencius Moldbug</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erik_von_Kuehnelt-Leddihn">Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evelyn_Waugh">Evelyn Waugh</a>, and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hans-Hermann_Hoppe">Hans Herman-Hoppe</a>, to name just a few. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>Ring of Fnargl</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Sith</strong> — See <em>czarnoksieznik</em>. <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Slow history</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Territory</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Thede</strong> — A social ingroup with a distinct and expressed identity, or, as a (one-place) <a href="http://lesswrong.com/lw/ro/2place_and_1place_words/">function</a> thede(x), a particular such ingroup that x identifies with. <a href="http://nydwracu.wordpress.com/2013/03/27/why-anarcho-fascism-an-introduction-to-group-dynamics/">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Townie</strong> — See <em>Vaisya.</em> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Traditionalism</strong> — <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Ultracalvinism</strong> — See <em>Universalism.</em> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/06/short-history-of-ultracalvinism.html">[1]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Underclass</strong> — Dalits and Helots. <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Vaisya</strong> — One of Mencius Moldbug’s five <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">castes</a>. Defines status by productive employment for men, attractiveness and motherhood for women, and a successful family life and social participation for both. Additional status can be conferred by participation in the military, where they usually become NCOs. Usually not interested in the world outside what directly relates to their life. Frequently referred to as “middle Americans” or, less accurately, “red-staters”. Allied with the Optimates against the Brahmins, Dalits, and Helots. <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/castes-of-united-states.html">[1]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/bdh-ov-conflict_07.html">[2]</a> <a href="http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/05/roth-castes-chimps-and-rangordnung.html">[3]</a> <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Whig history</strong> — A form of historical revisionism that seeks to portray all of history as inevitably improving up until the present regime. A form of “history is written by the victors”. Obviously, the present system has every incentive to portray itself as superior to all past systems. Reactionaries point out this is not the case, and actually see present society in a state of severe decline, pointing to historically <a href="http://www.acceleratingfuture.com/michael/blog/2010/02/better-all-the-time/">high levels of crime</a>,<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/03/health/suicide-rate-rises-sharply-in-us.html">suicide</a>, <a href="http://www.moreright.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/debt.png">government</a> and <a href="http://www.moreright.net/?attachment_id=843">household debt</a>, <a href="http://www.nhh.no/Files/Filer/institutter/for/dp/2011/1811.pdf">increasing time preference</a>, and low levels of<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bowling_Alone">civic participation</a> and <a href="http://www.dartmouth.edu/~blnchflr/papers/jpube.pdf">self-reported happiness</a> as a few examples of a current cultural and historical crisis. The <a href="http://www.hoover.org/publications/defining-ideas/article/145631">demographic crisis in First World countries</a> is cited as another example of decline. <span class="glossary-source">MR</span></p>

  <p><strong>White magic</strong> — Attempting to clarify the meaning of existing words that divide the semantic territory, usually<em>ideographs</em>. Overlaps substantially with analytic philosophy; the analytic method, best exemplified by Rawls’ treatment of the subject of justice, is white magic to the core. <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>

  <p><strong>Wizard</strong> — A practitioner of <em>magic</em>. <span class="glossary-source">NY</span></p>
</body>
</html>
